I too would like to warmly welcome you to the Bundesbank symposium. I am delighted that so many of you could join us at the Marriott hotel today. I would like to extend a particularly warm welcome to all speakers and panel members: thank you for coming and agreeing to share your knowledge with us today.
I would like to take the opportunity to talk to you today about the topics that concern me the most at present in my role as a banking supervisor and Deputy President of the Deutsche Bundesbank. Let me begin with the following scenario: imagine a car which has a rusty chassis and a leaking fuel tank – but covered by a fresh and gleaming coat of paint. The owner takes it for a road safety inspection and the inspection agency tells him that everything is fine. And now imagine that this rickety car represents the banking industry, and the inspection agency stands for banking supervisors. At least, this is the comparison recently drawn by the German newspaper “Die Welt”. Today, I am looking forward to talking about a bank's security features and correcting the belief that nothing has really changed at the banks since the crisis. I would like to start by saying that international standards now require every internationally active bank to have a reconditioned engine, meaning a detailed and coherent business and risk strategy; much better suspension, meaning an improved risk management framework; and a stronger chassis, meaning a larger capital and liquidity buffer. This should make it clear that regulators and supervisors have achieved a great deal over the last three and a half years.
At the Pittsburgh summit three and a half years ago, G20 leaders vowed to renew the financial sector’s regulatory and supervisory framework. Since then, we have amended hundreds of global, European and national regulations and, it sometimes seems, fine-tuned every setting we could find.
The most important part of this overhaul is the upcoming introduction of Basel III, which lies at the very heart of the G20initiatives. Basel III is aimed at strengthening the chassis in order to increase and improve the quality of the capital buffer for every European bank and introduce capital add-ons for global systemically important banks. The European Capital Requirements Directive (CRD IV) and the Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR), as well as the German implementing legislation, have largely been finalised. This means that the key elements of the regulation, based on lessons learned from the financial crisis, have already been taken care of. Basel III will only be implemented in Europe next year – most likely on 1 January 2014 – a year later than intended by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. Despite the slight delay, this reflects the will and the determination of the Europeans to press ahead with the process of international harmonisation.
What else has been achieved? In addition to increased capital requirements, financial institutions are now subject to enhanced risk capture, harmonised liquidity standards and revised governance requirements. These measures extend far beyond the central topic of “remuneration”, which receives so much media attention. Europeans have also taken a new institutional approach in the form of the European System of Financial Supervision (ESFS). This January, the Bundesbank was also assigned a further task. Its new macroprudential mandate acknowledges the fact that microprudential supervision must also take into account macroprudential aspects.
The points I have outlined should be enough to support the argument that in no way have regulators and supervisors failed to take action over the last few years. Instead, they have worked hard to introduce a raft of measures, many of which have already been implemented.
But what needs to be done to preserve and build on our accomplishments?I believe that we must now focus our efforts on implementing what has already been agreed. Rulemaking alone will not get us anywhere. The consistent implementation of the new rules in all large financial centres worldwide is key to the success of banking regulation. This is the only way in which we can apply another lesson learned from the crisis – having different rules creates incentives for regulatory and supervisory arbitrage, and these are risk factors which must not be underestimated due to the high levels of integration between the financial markets and their participants. However, it is just as important to see how the wide variety of new rules will interact in practice.
As I have already mentioned, Basel III is a key component of the new set of regulations. How effective the new rules are depends heavily on the extent to which they can be implemented worldwide. This is the only way to strengthen financial stability around the world, and this is why all G20 leaders have repeatedly pledged to implement these global standards at summits.
I am therefore very much in favour of regular reviews of all member states’ compliance – including the entire G20 – with Basel III by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. A month ago, the latest survey results were published. These showed that each country has taken steps towards implementation, but that the application of the final rules has been delayed in some countries.
Not only does the Basel Committee regularly review whether the G20 countries are promptly adopting the new Basel II, II.5 and III standards, it also verifies the consistent legislative implementation of the internationally agreed rules. Last year, Japan, the United States and the European Union came under review. The final assessment for the USA and the EU will only be carried out once the final rules are actually in place. These comparative studies, known as peer reviews, reveal weaknesses in national implementation and make them public. This “name and shame” approach creates an incentive to transpose the Basel III rules into national law on a one-to-one basis wherever possible.
Let me give you an example of what I mean here. Take, for instance, the Internal Ratings-Based (IRB) approach used for calculating minimum own funds requirements. The implementation of Basel III within the EU attracted criticism from the Basel Committee because, for instance, IRB institutions are permitted to permanently apply the Credit Risk Standardised Approach for EU government bonds, meaning that they can set the capital required to back these sovereign exposures at zero. I am disappointed that this gap is unlikely to be closed; after all, gearing the capital backing required for government bonds to the actual risk would certainly make sense over the medium term.
Another key criticism raised by the Basel Committee concerned the definition of capital, notably the absence of a provision stating that common shares and reserves were the only permissible components of common equity tier 1 (CET 1) capital. The EU did not follow the Committee’s advice on this subject. Under the EU rules, public limited companies, too, are allowed to recognise capital instruments other than just equity shares. In this use of the principle of “substance over form”, banks are permitted to hold capital instruments other than common shares as common equity tier 1 capital, provided they meet all 14 criteria for common equity tier 1 capital such as loss-absorbency capacity. On this particular issue, I do not share the Basel Committee’s opinion but instead support the path taken by the European Union, as I believe this is the only way to appropriately address the variety of legal forms and the lack of harmonisation in company law across the EU, to say nothing of the traditional principle of equal treatment. Also, I consider the impact on internationally active banks, which are the focal point of the Basel Committee’s activities, to be immaterial. After all, the vast majority of these institutions raise capital by issuing equity shares.
The G20 banking supervisors – the technical inspection authorities that test and certify the vehicle’s roadworthiness, as it were – have also developed a new supervisory process designed to implement the new standards for national supervisors. And this process is already having an effect. Expert groups comprising supervisors from different countries conduct on-site inspections – contacting the banks directly, for instance – to examine how the Basel standards work in practice. Their main objective is to explore whether the national rules produce consistent outcomes. The assessment is anything but easy – national rules, supervisory discretion and the risk profile of the bank portfolio in question are all factors that impact on the calculated risk weights. While matters such as the national implementation of Basel III and supervisory practice should not influence risk weights, assigning different risk weights to different exposures is not only tolerable, but actually desirable.
As a case in point, the relevant Basel working group has conducted test portfolio exercises to assess whether the risk weights in the participating banks’ trading books were calculated consistently. Initial results of this recent study indicate that action needs to be taken. Once the Committee has completed its work, it will have to decide whether the existing modelling freedom needs to be restricted. There is talk of adjusting the rules for the supervisory model add-on factor, for instance. I think the outcome of this work will give supervisors some guidance rather than directly yielding any new regulations.
However, applying the Basel III framework worldwide is just one of the steps needed to mitigate the risk of international financial crises and to establish a level playing field globally. To preserve and build on what has already been accomplished, effective cooperation between the home and host supervisors of internationally active banking groups is important.
That is why I think it is counterproductive for countries to go it alone. To put it simply, special rules at the national level have no place in a world of internationally active banks. The renationalisation of regulations and banking supervision skews the playing field, encourages regulatory arbitrage and, as a result, might even provide a breeding ground for systemic risk.
The most popular example of this is surely the US regulatory proposal to tighten the supervisory criteria for major foreign banks operating in the United States. US subsidiaries of a foreign banking groups would then have bigger capital and liquidity buffers in case their parents got into difficulties. It is understandable why the USA is so interested in these national buffers, but this proposal makes it considerably more difficult to manage banking groups and contradicts the decisions made at the Pittsburgh G20 summit three and a half years ago. Or, to stay with the driving metaphor: yes, the envisaged US regulation is like an airbag which would protect passengers in a collision – but at the driver’s expense. The 2011 Cannes summit of the G20 heads of state or government also pledged to create a global framework governing the resolution of banks. The renationalisation tendencies currently being talked about are hampering the task of resolving an internationally active credit institution across national borders.
Some academics and policymakers and a number of international institutions are currently debating the merits of tightening the leverage ratio envisaged in the Basel III rules; that is, using a risk-insensitive key ratio to reduce banks’ gearing. “Tuning up the vehicle” in this manner is not something I would recommend – indeed, it is a case of a seemingly simple rule being touted as a panacea for supervisory problems. Over the last two years, the specific structure of the leverage ratio has been a topic of debate in the Basel Committee. This timeframe alone illustrates that the leverage ratio cannot be as simple as it is made out to be - at least not if it is supposed to be comparable across national borders. Why is that? Well, the answer is straightforward. The leverage ratio is based on balance sheet data, and what appears to be the simplest version of the ratio uses total assets as the denominator. Differences in accounting standards from one country to the next – just think of the various netting rules – mean that the comparability of balance sheet data is limited. What’s more, even if uniform standards did exist, a bank’s balance sheet would still reveal little about its actual investments, its actual risk exposures, because derivatives and other off-balance sheet items are disregarded. But these items ought to be taken into account, one way or another, if the leverage ratio is to be informative and more or less comparable. And this is when things start getting complicated again.
I’ve been told the leverage ratio is simple, and often heard that it’s an easy way to compare banks. But that is off the mark. In fact, the situation is actually quite paradoxical: either I’ve got a leverage ratio with a simple design – but it’s not comparable and thus of little use; or I’ve got a leverage ratio that’s comparable – but I need to make some effort to arrive at a “clean” ratio.
Some now believe that the risk-weighted equity ratios introduced by Basel II are the wrong way forward. I do not share that view. As I see it, we really ought to stick to a capital requirements regime that does not tar all assets with the same brush, one that is risk-sensitive. Otherwise, our regulation will provide false incentives for credit institutions. But that is not to say that the risk weighting methods used in practice are perfect; far from it. It would simply be a fatal error to throw the baby out with the bathwater on account of deficits – deficits that do indeed exist – and to compare credit institutions solely on the basis of a seemingly superior leverage ratio. In this case, particularly frail banks would be encouraged to become saturated with highly risky assets. Who could want such a thing? I certainly do not.
I do not oppose the leverage ratio; indeed, I have spoken out in favour of introducing it going forward, albeit as a Pillar 2 instrument. The leverage ratio is one of a number of useful instruments in a well-stocked toolkit, but it is not without its weaknesses!
Instead, I advocate that we further enhance some of the car’s features and make the technical inspection more stringent. In this case, I am only speaking about systemically important banks. We have to tackle the problem of “too big to fail” and “too complex to fail” in the best way possible. Today’s symposium addresses a key aspect of this – the structure of recovery and resolution planning.
We will have to work hard to create and implement the best framework possible for banking union. Although the timeframe for setting up a European single supervisory mechanism is very ambitious, we have already made quite a bit of progress. Equally important, and yet even more difficult in terms of decision-making, it seems, is the subject of bank resolution – be it the European resolution regime with a bail-in liability hierarchy or the single resolution mechanism, a European resolution authority and a central fund.
There are two key aspects to look at when dealing with this subject. First of all, we need a mechanism that would allow a large bank to be restructured and resolved without seriously jeopardising financial stability. Secondly, any losses incurred should be fairly distributed according to source and responsibility. However, this means that, more often than not, investors will have to bear the costs of risks for which they receive a risk premium if these risks materialise. Where possible, taxpayers should be left out of the equation altogether. A discussion on the topic of a bank “bail-in”, ie which losses will be imposed on creditors and shareholders when a bank is wound up, is long overdue. Consequently, we must quickly move to develop a well-thought out, unambiguous, rule-based European concept which allocates liability according to hierarchy and which shall pertain to all creditors of a bank. This will not only ensure legal clarity and market confidence but will also help creditors to assess risks appropriately.
The restructuring and winding up of banks under European supervision is ultimately about whether the future costs of restructuring measures will also be borne at European level, ie whether there will be direct access to the European restructuring fund. Without doubt, we need a European resolution mechanism because supervision and liability must be synchronised. It does not make sense to oversee banks at the European level while leaving their resolution to national authorities. A European-directed resolution mechanism with burden-sharing and a clear set of rules is exactly what is needed to reduce the problem of “too big to fail” or “too complex to fail”. I therefore fundamentally advocate the establishment of a European resolution authority. However, this must be established on a solid foundation, and this calls for an amendment to primary law.
But as I see it, the assumption of risk by the European resolution mechanism or even by a new authority should not lead to a “communitisation” of legacy risks at European level. The financial risks of national banking systems, which arose on the watch of national supervisors, should be borne by those responsible.
However, how can we ascertain what burdens or risks lie dormant in the banks that will be monitored by the European supervisory authority? To determine this, the ECB will examine banks’ balance sheets. The details of this balance sheet assessment have yet to be determined. Indeed, in carrying out this first task, the supervisory authority will have to prioritise attention to detail over speed. Only then can we achieve the goals of these examinations and uphold the reputation of the new supervisory authority.
Legacy risks should thus be borne by those who are responsible for them. And what about future risks that arise on the watch of the new European supervisory authority? Should the individual member state be completely left out of the equation? This would only be logical if the supervisory authority were the only factor influencing the weals and woes of a bank. However, this is not the case.  As a rule, banks’ balance sheets reflect the health of their respective national economy. The effects of national policy tools such as taxes and economic policy measures are therefore evident in the risk profiles of the banks concerned. Thus, it might make sense for liability risks to be divided between the national and European levels as long as economic and fiscal policies are not coordinated in the euro area. As you can see, there are more questions than answers on the issue of resolution.
To conclude, I would like to thank you for your attention. I am certain that, at the end of this symposium, you will leave the Marriott with the knowledge that we, supervisors and regulators, have gone far beyond merely scratching the surface on this matter. We are putting the banks through their paces by carrying out thorough examinations using the most up-to-date tools available.
But now I would like to hand you over to Mr Otto, who will moderate this event. He is editor-in-chief of the Zeitschrift für das gesamte Kreditwesen and someone I would call an expert in his field. Mr Otto, the floor is yours.

