I would like to thank you very much for inviting me to speak at this conference, which centres on the crucial issue of Europe’s future.
55 years ago today, on 8 October 1958, the first cardiac pacemaker was implanted in Stockholm. What then seemed like a medical miracle has now become a routine operation, giving patients with heart conditions a whole new lease of life.
European monetary union was long seen as a kind of pacemaker for European integration – a stepping stone towards political union. But right from the outset there were doubts about whether a single currency can really play that kind of role.
In an interview for the German news magazine "Spiegel" in 1996, Otmar Issing said, "Using monetary union as a pacemaker for political union is like putting the cart before the horse – it simply can't work."
The fact is that we’ve had a monetary union for nearly 15 years now, and yet political union still seems a distant prospect. What’s more, recent events have shown us that a monetary union without deeper political integration is prone to crises.
Today, I would like to talk to you about how we can make our monetary union less crisis-prone, and how we can ensure that the euro area remains a union of stability.
Without doubt, sustainable crisis resolution has to tackle the root causes of the crisis. The origins of the euro-area crisis are diverse, but they essentially lie in national imbalances, the shortcomings of the institutional framework and, above all, its implementation.
Broadly speaking, the imbalances in today’s crisis countries arose because, for many years, they had been borrowing to "live beyond their means".  In the language of economists, they had absorbed more than they produced for many years and therefore found themselves with persistent current account deficits – which were only possible because of easy external funding.
Strong wage rises and weak productivity growth in these countries made them less and less competitive. And, unlike before the launch of the single currency, they were no longer able to compensate by allowing their currency to depreciate in nominal terms.
Yet the crisis didn’t just expose national imbalances; it also revealed how vulnerable the monetary union was made by the flaws in its institutional framework. These flaws were there right from the start. It’s just that the largely favourable economic setting meant that they weren’t particularly noticeable in the first decade of monetary union.
The unique structure of Europe’s monetary union is a source of inherent instability: the Eurosystem has a single monetary and foreign exchange policy but each country is responsible for its own fiscal and economic policy. This kind of framework allows far more of the consequences of one country’s unsound fiscal policy to be passed on to the other member countries.
To limit the resulting incentives for government borrowing, the founding fathers of the monetary union established fiscal rules – notably the deficit limit, the no bail-out rule and the ban on monetary financing of governments. While the no bail-out rule was intended to ensure that the member states are not made liable for other countries’ debts, the ban on monetary financing of governments was aimed at protecting the Eurosystem and thus also the single currency.
High debt levels increase the pressure on a central bank to fund government debt by "printing more money" to loosen the restraints on government budgets. But this can easily lead to high inflation.  Examples of this phenomenon range from the Latin monetary union of the late nineteenth century to the recent past.
Between 1975 and 1981, for example, the Banca d’Italia was obliged to purchase Italian government bonds that could not be placed on the market. While we know that correlation doesn’t equal causation, it is striking that this unfortunate interlude coincided with a rise in government debt from 18 trillion to 100 trillion lire and average annual inflation of almost 17 percent. By way of comparison, inflation was around 4½ percent in Germany and a mere 3 percent in Switzerland during the same period.
Unfortunately, the member states have shown about as much respect for the debt rules of the Maastricht Treaty and the Stability and Growth Pact as modern city-dwellers show for red lights at pedestrian crossings.
Berlin, Paris and Rome also ignored the red lights and even successfully campaigned to ensure that this behaviour was not penalised. This steadily chipped away at the credibility of the rules.
And it seems that the no bail-out clause lacked credibility too; that might also explain why even highly-indebted member states only had very low risk premiums on their debt in the euro’s first decade. Consequently, the financial markets failed to have a disciplining effect on government finances.
It seems that investors simply couldn’t imagine that the other member states would allow one of the euro-area countries to default – and they weren’t entirely wrong about that, as we now know.
One reason for this was probably that the international capital rules adopted in the early 1990s allow banks to treat government bonds in their domestic currency as a risk-free investment requiring no capital backing. This applied regardless of how risky financial market investors considered the bonds to be. Of course, this regulatory treatment not only encouraged banks to buy government bonds; it also stopped them from taking the no bail-out clause that seriously.
So, the fiscal rules proved not to be an effective bulwark against excessive government debt. What’s more, some politicians called the ban on monetary financing of governments into question during the crisis, arguing that "needs must".
However, it also turned out to be a mistake to focus solely on fiscal developments when setting up the monetary union. As important as sound public finances are, other macroeconomic imbalances
 also pose risks to the stability of the euro area: persistent current account deficits, high private debt, a loss of competitiveness or an inefficient use of resources. Ultimately, the risk of contagion from country to country was also underestimated when the monetary union was created.
Another Achilles’ heel in the euro area’s institutional framework was that the member states were largely responsible for financial market supervision and regulation. This led to "regulatory arbitrage", with banks simply moving their business to the locations with the least strict supervisory regimes, racking up major risks in those places. One of the main problems during the euro-area crisis was that some countries had outsized financial sectors.
Substantial measures were taken to contain the euro-area crisis. These measures – notably the two European stability mechanisms, the EFSF and the ESM – stabilised the euro area in the short term by offering financial assistance in exchange for structural reforms. Technically, that is tantamount to funding current account deficits with public money. In return, the recipient countries promised to tackle the root causes of their problems.
In effect, however, the numerous crisis measures increased mutual liability within the euro area without establishing any effective control rights in return. This upset the balance between liability and control.
Yet I believe that this balance is fundamental to the stability of Europe’s monetary union. And that brings us to one of the fundamental questions listed on the invitation to this conference: whether to opt for a fiscal union or a more rigorous "Maastricht mark two" as a concerted policy pursued by each nation state.
One option for redressing the balance would be to make greater mutual liability conditional on greater mutual control. The member states would then have to be prepared to relinquish national sovereign rights to the European level and thus combine the existing monetary union with a fiscal union.
However, it seems to me that there isn’t a broad consensus for this among the member states. In a recent survey (carried out by Yougov on behalf of Open Europe Berlin), a slim majority of Germans advocated making the euro area a political union, including tougher EU-level controls on national budgets.
But this would require changes to both the national constitutions and the EU Treaties, whilst also ensuring that the euro-area framework remains focused on stability. All in all, I believe that there isn’t the necessary political support in most countries for the idea of relinquishing national sovereignty, at least for the foreseeable future.
As long as the will for such a move is lacking, I regard strengthening the existing Maastricht framework as the only viable solution. To achieve this, we need to eliminate the flaws I have mentioned here today.
Strengthening the Maastricht rules means, above all, tightening the requirements so that they reinforce the principle that each country should be responsible for their own finances. By all means, we should maintain the crisis mechanism for staving off threats to financial stability – but as a true last resort. For this to work, it needs to be possible to declare governments and, above all,  banks insolvent without endangering the stability of the financial system. This means establishing a banking union which encompasses both a European-level supervisory mechanism for systemically important financial institutions and a clear-cut resolution and restructuring regime.
Many positive steps have already been taken to address the flaws in the existing set-up: the Stability and Growth Pact has been made stricter and a procedure established to combat macroeconomic imbalances. In addition, the signatories of the European Fiscal Compact have made a commitment to enshrine binding debt brake rules in their national legislation.
Without wishing to pour cold water on these achievements, I should add that it is not enough to make the rules stricter – they also have to be applied in practice. Above all, it is down to the European Commission to ensure that the rules are applied strictly, making the framework more credible.
In terms of institutional reform, the banking union – encompassing a Single Supervisory Mechanism and a Single Resolution Mechanism – is the major work in progress at the moment.
Combined with other initiatives, the banking union can play an important part in curing one of the Achilles’ heels of European monetary union. To sever the harmful link between banks and governments, we will also need to end the preferential regulatory treatment of government bonds in the medium term.
Preparations for the Single Supervisory Mechanism based at the ECB are now being made against the clock so that it can be launched on schedule in a year's time. Given the potential conflicts of interest between the new supervisory tasks and the ECB Governing Council’s monetary policy mandate, basing the Single Supervisory Mechanism at the ECB is not without its problems.
Certain precautionary measures are being taken to minimise such conflicts of interest from the outset. But in the long run it would still be advisable to move banking supervisory tasks away from the ECB and make the supervisory authority a separate European institution.
The euro area is not alone in this trend of transferring more and more responsibilities to central banks. At first sight, this may seem like a vote of confidence in the abilities of central banks, but it runs the risk of overburdening them in the long run.
I found politicians’ huge expectations of central banks at the height of the crisis particularly questionable.  Monetary policy played a substantial role in preventing an escalation of the crisis. However, this took it a long way into uncharted – and dangerous – territory.
Monetary policy faces a delicate balancing act. It must ensure that it is not held to ransom by politicians. And it must take care not to get roped into fiscal objectives, thus creating a situation in which monetary policy is largely dictated by fiscal considerations and inflation control is treated as secondary to the government’s financing needs or short-term financial stability aspects.
It is not the Eurosystem’s job to keep banks solvent. The provision of liquidity by central banks must not become a substitute for potentially necessary recapitalisation by governments.
I’m also well aware that a financial crisis makes it harder to set clear boundaries between monetary policy and fiscal policy. But the more monetary policy stretches these boundaries, the more its independence will be called into question and the louder demands to control central banks will become.
Renowned economists such as Olivier Blanchard or Joseph Stiglitz have recently criticised aspects of central bank independence. In a recent speech, Stiglitz argued that "The notion of the desirability of an independent central bank was predicated on the belief that monetary policy was a technocratic matter, with no distributional consequences". He said that the crisis had called this notion into question, adding "monetary authorities have been engaged in quasi-fiscal operations (…) in ways that are non-transparent, and often seem capricious". And Blanchard recently stated that "central bank independence wasn’t designed for what central banks are now asked to do".
The independence of central banks can only be justified if they have a narrow remit, which means that central banks can best protect their independence by interpreting their mandate narrowly.
Incidentally, I don’t share the view that the Eurosystem was the only effective player during the crisis. If it had not stepped into the breach, politicians would have been forced to act. And I am convinced that they – our democratically elected representatives – would have done just that.
Ladies and gentlemen, in the debate about central bank independence, I am not, of course, defending our dearly-held right to take independent decisions out of pure self-interest. On the contrary, I'm defending price stability. Both academic analysis and real-life experience confirm that central bank independence is a key precondition for a stable currency.
Borrowing from Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s definition of freedom, it can be said that central bank independence does not give the central bank a licence to do as it pleases; it means that it is not forced to do what it does not want to – funding cash-strapped governments, for example.
In line with its mandate, the ECB Governing Council has cut the key interest rates to a record low. As underlying price pressures in the euro area are likely to remain subdued over the medium term, the Governing Council has announced that it expects not to raise the key interest rates for an extended period of time.
We make monetary policy for the entire euro area, not for individual countries. Our monetary policy discussions do not centre on the impact of the single monetary policy on individual member states. If imbalances arise, it is up to other policy areas to intervene where necessary using the tools at their disposal.
Yet it is also clear that a low interest rate policy entails perverse incentives in the long run, and they warrant attention. The effectiveness of extremely low interest rates wanes over time, while the associated risks increase.
In this context, I would like to highlight three potential risks in particular. First, the low interest rate environment could delay the necessary balance sheet adjustments in the corporate and banking sectors.
Second, the low interest rates could create an incentive to take excessive risks, also described as the "search for yield". This could lead to excessive asset price growth.
Third, the low interest rate environment could encourage governments to put off important consolidation measures and reforms rather than tackling them head on.
But it is likewise clear that monetary policy tools cannot solve the euro-area crisis. The ECB Governing Council is unanimous on that point.
The institutional reforms I have outlined are necessary but not sufficient to ensure a stable monetary union. Satisfying the requirements of a monetary union also means taking economic policy measures at national level which ensure competitiveness and sustainable economic growth. This applies especially – but not exclusively – to the so-called crisis countries.
Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble said in his speech that the crisis countries have already made substantial progress in the adjustment process. Yet there is no doubt that these countries still have a long way to go given that their private and public sector debt is mostly high.
These countries are often described as being on the periphery of the euro area, which would seem to imply that the core euro-area countries are in top form. On the contrary.
France, for example, can hardly be described as a crisis country, yet it also needs to become more competitive, especially given that the French economy has lost a seventh of its share in the world market over the past five years. And France needs to be more ambitious in its budget consolidation. Like Germany, France must lead by example.
Germany also faces some economic policy challenges, and not just because it needs to set an example for the rest of Europe. Germany is doing comparatively well – partly because of the reforms of the past decade. It has a balanced  government budget, low unemployment and a high level of competitiveness.  But there are no grounds for complacency.
It would be a big mistake to turn back the clock on these reforms now.  Michael Steen, the Frankfurt correspondent for the Financial Times, recently wrote "(…) the biggest single risk for Germany is arguably that it gives up the gains it made in competitiveness over the past decade".
Germany needs to prepare for the challenges of the 21st century. Increasing globalisation, the transformation of Germany’s energy system, the sustainability gap in public finances and, above all, demographic change will be the major challenges facing German politicians in the coming decades. In another speech I gave recently, I outlined in more detail where I feel specific action should be taken.
The euro area can only be strong and economically successful if its individual member states are too.
Ladies and gentlemen
The writer Mary de Rachewiltz once said that money was the obscene doppelganger of creative writing, because they are both made from nothing, their economies both hinge on moderation and efficiency yet they both tend towards rampant growth.
As a central banker, I know rather more about monetary policy than about poetry. But I do know that too many words can be just as inflationary as too much money. So on that note, I’ll now bring my speech to a close.
Europe is facing major challenges. But I think that we can overcome the problems in the euro area if we move in the right direction.
I do not agree with the notion that monetary union cannot work. It is important that we maintain the euro area as a union of stability. That way, monetary union can also act as the pacemaker for deeper European integration.

