I was very honoured to receive your invitation to speak here today at this year’s new year’s reception, which I was only too happy to accept. I remember standing here two years ago looking back at an “ambivalent” year 2010 – the year in which the European sovereign debt crisis came to a head. Today I would like to touch on four topics which will be of particular importance for the stability of the financial system in 2013. These are
1. the European debt crisis, which continues to exert a firm hold on us, as is illustrated by the current discussions about Cyprus,
2. the crisis in the shipping industry, which resulted from the low-interest rate environment at the beginning of the millennium,
3. price developments on the German housing market, which are increasingly becoming the focus of public attention,
4. the repercussions for financial institutions and households resulting from the current low-interest rate environment.
I would like to begin by focussing on the sovereign debt crisis, which continues to present the greatest risk to financial stability. One question which is being raised more and more often is whether we have seen the worst of it. Tensions on the financial markets have, indeed, eased significantly since the summer of 2012; not just on the markets for government bonds, but also, for example, in terms of the financing conditions of banks in the crisis countries. This is indicated by the early redemption of some of the funds borrowed within the framework of the first three-year tender and the declining TARGET balances of the Eurosystem central banks.
Nevertheless, uncertainty flares up time and time again on the financial markets owing to concerns about economic and political developments in the crisis countries. In my opinion, it is still much too early to give the all-clear. It is more a question of taking advantage of the positive sentiment on the markets to tackle the unresolved problems in the euro area in a resolute manner. There are three particularly pressing issues which still need to be put right.
First of all, the member states are called upon to make headway in implementing the necessary structural reforms and consolidation measures – despite the economic and political turbulences they are experiencing. Banks – not only in crisis countries – must continue to clean up their balance sheets and further strengthen their profitability. And finally, work must also continue at the institutional level in creating a banking union, which must be approached with due caution. Here we have to put quality before speed.
Above all, it should not be forgotten that it was the measures implemented by the central banks that played a crucial role in calming the markets. These measures also bought some time for policymakers and the market players. Low interest rates and abundant supplies of liquidity are not a cure-all, however. And they certainly do not constitute a suitable therapy for tackling the crisis. Furthermore – like any emergency medicine – these measures do not come without their fair share of potential risks and side-effects.
Since the outbreak of the financial crisis, highly indebted countries and certain economic sectors have been subjected to a painful cleanup process. This is the after-effect of a cocktail consisting of overly optimistic expectations mixed with unsustainable borrowing. These factors also strike a chord with the difficulties experienced in international merchant shipping, which hit Hamburg doubly hard as the “gateway to the world”. For one, Hamburg is home to over 120 shipping companies. What is more, the financial services linked to shipping play a prominent role in the city’s financial centre. The reasons for the deep-rooted crisis in shipping are essentially twofold.
First, the expectations of sustainable growth in trading volumes and transport revenues came to an abrupt end. Following the global economic downturn in autumn 2008, freight rates plummeted to unforeseen depths. To this day, this declining trend has not yet been reversed. The New ConTex Index, which is calculated in Hamburg and measures charter rates for container ships, currently stands at only a little more than a third of the value of October 2007, back when the index was introduced.
Second, the virtually unchecked rise in capacity further complicates the situation because against the backdrop of cheaply available finance and optimistic expectations the order books of shipyards across the world have become full. Further pressure comes from the fact that, on the grounds of cost, increasingly larger ships are being ordered while smaller ships are gradually being scrapped.
As a result, the financing of shipping in Germany sailed into troubled waters. In many cases, equity capital providers were closed-end funds. The banks had contributed the necessary high share of debt capital on favourable terms. In the meantime, many shipping funds are making losses or even have filed for insolvency. The portfolios of the German banks that were involved in the financing of shipping deteriorated significantly. Some of them belonged or belong to the world’s leading equity capital providers in this sector. Meanwhile, new business is being scaled back, and some of the previously major credit providers have withdrawn from this market sector. As is the case in the banking industry, shipping companies, together with the entire industry, now face the challenge of reviewing their business model in a difficult market environment in order to raise the necessary equity and debt capital for the future. In this context, it seems important to consider the compatibility of risk and returns, and ensure sufficient transparency in this regard for capital providers and other involved parties. This could also pave the way for new sources of finance beyond conventional bank lending.
The financing of shipping undoubtedly represents a substantial regional and sectoral risk in the banking industry. In mid-2012, loans issued by the major credit providers amounted to just over €100 billion. Banking supervisors have been closely analysing the affected institutions for some time. At the same time, the Bundesbank has been assessing and evaluating the crisis from a broader perspective with a keen eye on the stability of the entire financial system. Up until now, robust economic activity has helped the German banking system to cope with the pressures from problem business areas such as the financing of shipping. It would be wrong to yield now to the temptation presented by the current low-interest rate environment to postpone cleaning up the balance sheets.
There is no doubt that the very low money market and capital market interest rates together with the ample liquidity now available in the international financial system have allayed the impact of the financial and sovereign debt crisis. At the same time, however, there is a risk that the longer low interest rates persist the more they will contribute to exaggerated movements in assets. As a negative example of this, I would like to remind you of some of the most recent price and credit bubbles in housing markets abroad. For example, the bursting of the price bubble on the US mortgage market was the main trigger of the global financial crisis.
On the other hand, the German housing market is only now starting to take off after years of stagnation. Since last year at the latest, the rising trend in property prices has become a focal point of public interest. The Bundesbank dedicated a section of its 2012 Financial Stability Review to this development. Meanwhile, we have accumulated data for the entire year. According to these figures, prices increased in a similarly strong fashion to 2011. Last year, residential property prices rose on average by 5.3 percent in 125 German cities. In the seven largest cities, including Hamburg, the trend was even more striking, with prices rising as much as 8.2 percent.
However, two important aspects must be mentioned on this point. First: for a long time, property prices on the German housing market developed at a slower rate than those in other countries. In this respect, the relatively strong upward movement of late could be seen as a catching-up process. Second: the trend differs from region to region. This is confirmed by the figures of this regional office of the Bundesbank for its area of responsibility. While residential property prices in Hamburg jumped considerably last year by 8.4 percent, the increase in Schleswig-Holstein was much more subdued. In some of the larger cities, prices only went up by around 2 percent on average. In Mecklenburg-West Pomerania, even in the bigger town and cities, prices only increased by 1¾ percent. Thus, looking at Germany as a whole, it is certainly not accurate to speak of a housing bubble to date.
Moreover, although continual price increases are a necessary precondition for the emergence of a housing bubble, they are not sufficient in and of themselves. To threaten the stability of the financial system, a price bubble must be accompanied by credit growth which is incommensurate with the risk-bearing capacity of the borrowers and creditors involved. In light of the following facts, I see no evidence of such a development thus far.
1. Growth in housing loans remained moderate in Germany in 2011 and 2012. Households are not becoming more indebted, but instead are increasing the amount of own capital they put up in purchasing a property.
2. Lending standards at German banks are traditionally conservative. This is related to the widespread use of the Pfandbrief as a refinancing instrument, which sets limits for mortgage lending.
3. According to banking surveys, lending standards for housing loans have even become somewhat more restrictive in Germany. This is in stark contrast to former boom countries, in which lending standards became more and more watered down as bubbles grew.
4. Finally, the resilience of households and banks has improved over the past few years thanks to the robust economy and favourable employment trends.
However, experience in other countries has shown that the initial phases of price exaggerations may also be accompanied by low credit growth. Thus, we must keep a close look-out. And we must also keep an eye on the behaviour of households and financial institutions.
At present, the brunt of the burden is being felt by investors who place their faith in instruments with a safe credit rating which, however, yield a low return. This is particularly true of life insurance companies who have responded to the situation by once again reducing their policyholders’ profit participation in 2012. As a supplement to building up additional reserves, this is a wise course of action in terms of securing their long-term resilience. BaFin stress tests have shown that German insurers’ resilience continues to be adequate on the whole. This suggests that there has been no hazardous widening of the gap between their obligations to pay customers a return on the one hand and declining returns on standard forms of investment on the other.
In light of the challenging financial environment, there are signs of German insurers cautiously restructuring their business policy, for example, by gearing their activities to the funding of infrastructure projects and direct lending to enterprises and households as well as to commercial and residential real estate financing. As things currently stand, the credit segment represents a relatively small chunk of insurers’ overall investment activity. However, in years to come, this area of focus is likely to gain in importance.
Following a cautious path of diversification can definitely be regarded as a positive development. Even so, I would like to draw your attention to two aspects which need to be borne in mind. First, any inroads made into new business areas need to be accompanied by a corresponding adjustment of the company in question’s risk management strategy. Second, by following this avenue, insurers are encroaching on an area of activity that has traditionally been the preserve of banks, and are increasing the competitive pressure in this field.
German banks’ profitability has proven robust up to now. Indeed, they initially benefited from falling interest rates because the higher long-term interest rate applying to granted loans is only gradually being eroded by new business, while yields on deposits have been lowered at a faster rate. As interest levels plummeted in 2009 and 2010, the banks enjoyed a corresponding increase in margins. This was true, above all, for savings banks and credit cooperatives.
The positive impact which arose from the interest rate cuts has, it seems, now dissipated. Instead, we are feeling the pinch of low interest rates and narrowed margins on the part of credit institutions. These challenges are compounded by two structural developments.
For one thing, interest expenditure is being affected. During the crisis, the market proved volatile as a provider of financing, and more and more banks “rediscovered” the classical deposit business segment. New regulatory provisions have made this line of activity additionally attractive. Nevertheless, increased competition for deposit business might lead to a further erosion of interest margins.
For another, margins are being squeezed from the income side. It has been evident for some time that enterprises with a strong credit rating fare better at securing favourable wholesale funding than banks. It makes perfect sense for enterprises to diversify their funding. The downside of this is that it simultaneously causes medium to long-term bank business to disappear. In any case, it places a strain on banks' profitability and their asset quality tends to deteriorate. We will keenly monitor the extent to which banks refrain from taking evasive action and go back to concentrating on supposedly higher-yielding investments which, however, are inclined to entail greater risk. We have good reason, for example, to observe how real estate-related lending develops in future.
In this environment, traditionally “safe” ways of investing money such as long-term savings deposits and life insurance policies are proving less profitable for households. This in itself should give them an incentive to switch to alternative forms of investment which offer potentially higher yields. The motivation to act is, however, being undermined by the uncertainty emanating from the financial crisis.
In this context, two trends have been evident to date. First, German households are continuing to acquire financial assets, despite the low-interest rate environment. Second, they are pursuing a risk-averse strategy, with a strong preference for liquidity. Especially risk-prone assets such as equity funds, but also bond funds and money market funds, are suffering net outflows of capital. As a consequence of this combination of factors, short-term customer deposits with credit institutions, which are generally non-interest bearing, continue to expand, regardless of their negative real rate of interest, leading to a real loss of value for savers. Low interest rates are leading to an expropriation of savers over the medium to long term. This is yet another reason why an exit from the low-interest rate environment should take place at the right time. 

