Thank you for making me feel so welcome. I am pleased to have been invited to come to the Wirtschaftstag der Volks- und Raiffeisenbanken.
Normally, it is big stars of show business who appear at the Jahrhunderthalle. Among the highlights in November is the heavy metal band Motörhead. There is one thing that I can promise you already, my comments will be low-pitched in comparison.
On the other hand, comparing central bankers with rock stars is no longer completely absurd. Not so long ago, Raghuram Rajan, the former Chief Economist of the IMF, claimed that central bankers nowadays enjoy the popularity of rock stars. Interestingly, he has now joined the club himself as Governor of the Reserve Bank of India.
Even just a few years ago, however, no one would have had the idea of putting central bankers in the same category as rock stars. Mervyn King, the former Governor of the Bank of England, said that his ambition for monetary policy was to be boring.
Since the financial, economic and sovereign debt crisis, the business of central bankers has been anything but boring, however. A broader public has recognised what powerful instruments central banks have at their disposal. This has brought the actions of central banks to the forefront of media and political interest. The Eurosystem’s interest rate cut last week, for example, has been dominating the front pages of all the national daily newspapers in Germany.
When the crisis was at its height, some people were talking up the European Central Bank as the only body capable of action in the euro area. A book by Neil Irwin, the Washington Post columnist and commentator on economic affairs, bears the title "The Alchemists: Three Central Bankers and a World on Fire". That, too, reveals what powers central banks are now credited with.
The truth is that the central banks of the major industrial countries made interventions which counteracted a downward economic spiral and helped to prevent a collapse of the global financial system.
The Eurosystem, too, responded with extensive measures, employing both standard and non-standard instruments.
Non-standard measures, such as the full allotment of tenders in refinancing operations and very long-running refinancing operations were taken not least because the financial market crisis had led to a situation in which banks were lending hardly any money to each other. This meant that the financial system was no longer able to fulfil its economic function.
The Governing Council of the ECB also deployed its standard set of instruments. Key interests rates were cut to an all-time low, close to what is known as the "zero lower bound".
Heightened interest in the actions of central banks stems, however, from the fact that these arouse concerns and scepticism in many cases.
Several of the measures have taken central banks to the outer bounds of fiscal policy. This is especially problematic in the euro area since, here, a single monetary policy still coexists with autonomous national fiscal policies. Fiscal policy decisions were quite deliberately not communitised when the monetary union was established. Rather, the institutional framework of the Maastricht Treaty relies on the individual member states assuming their own responsibility for fiscal policy: the one who takes the decisions is also the one who is liable.
Moreover, central bank measures also have risks and side effects and not everything we are capable of doing as a central bank is something we are allowed to do. If we lose sight of that fact, we are jeopardising the trust placed in us as independent guardians of price stability. Trust and credibility are our most valuable capital, however. At the end of the day, money is nothing other than trust that has taken on solid form.
With many crisis measures, it is true to say that there is an innate tension between what appears to be necessary in the short term and what is right in the long run. Repeatedly acting with the aim of calming things down over the short term can result in the establishment of a regulatory framework that is not sustainable on a lasting basis.
For me, a key concern is maintaining the monetary union as a union of stability. To do that, we must not lose sight of these medium to long-term aspects. Doctors should not administer the wrong medicine to patients in intensive care, either.
The Governing Council of the ECB has the task of setting key interest rates at a level that safeguards price stability throughout the euro area. As a benchmark for price stability, we have specified an inflation rate below, but close to, 2 percent over the medium term.
In the wake of the sovereign debt crisis, the euro area slid into a recession and, during such an economic downturn, upward pressure on prices also eases significantly. The rate of price increase in October, for example, was only 0.7 percent, the lowest figure since 2009. Even though falling energy prices and special factors played a big part in the figure for October, price pressure is also likely to remain low for the next two years as well.  For this year and next year, current forecasts predict inflation of roughly 1½ percent.
Nor is there any broad monetary growth indicating risks of inflation over the medium to long term. The Eurosystem has indeed created a large amount of liquidity, but since banks’ lending is still weak, growth in the monetary aggregate relevant to price developments is no more than moderate.
Apart from that, it is not just the countries in crisis where inflation is low. In Germany, the inflation rate has recently been 1.2 percent higher than the euro-area average. Even so, it is significantly lower than 2 percent.
The figures have already led to some economists summoning up the spectre of deflation. To put it quite plainly: a deflation scenario is not something we on the Governing Council expect. One of the things arguing against it is the fact that medium to long-term inflation expectations are still solidly anchored.
Furthermore, price developments in the crisis countries are strongly shaped by the efforts being undertaken to regain competitiveness and therefore the outcome of necessary adjustments and not a case of self-reinforcing deflation.
Unquestionably, monetary policy has been very expansionary for some time now. In that respect, the euro area is no different than other large economic areas such as the USA and Japan.
Periods of very low interest rates are indeed unusual, but there have been several in the past. In Germany, too, there were short stretches of time in the 1970s, during which the central bank interest rate was below the current rate of inflation, which meant the short-term real rate of interest was negative. And we should not forget that the recent crisis was accompanied by the severest economic slump since the end of the Second World War.
After the excesses of the pre-crisis period, many countries have to reduce their high levels of public and private debt and become more competitive. This is an arduous process which will dampen economic growth for years to come. Given the low rates of inflation to be expected over the medium term and sluggish economic growth, an expansionary monetary policy stance in the euro area is justified.
Nevertheless, the low-interest-rate environment is not without risks in the long run. William White, the former Economic Adviser and Head of the Monetary and Economic Department at the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), put the risks of persistently low interest rates in a nutshell.
"It is also the case that ultra easy monetary policies can eventually threaten the health of financial institutions and the functioning of financial markets, threaten the "independence" of central banks, and can encourage imprudent behavior on the part of governments."
A policy of very low interest rates has many different kinds of effects on the real economy and finance. Besides it supporting influences, it harbours challenges for many areas of the economy and the general public.
The initial aim of extremely low interest rates is to stimulate economic activity. Through the "interest rate channel", low key interest rates are designed to achieve, among other things, favourable financing conditions.
They generally make corporate investment more attractive. Average bank interest rates for loans to enterprises in Germany (in new business) fell from 5.8 percent in September 2008 to 2.1 percent in September 2013.
Low rates of interest also support private consumption and housing construction. We are seeing both of these things at present in Germany. Average bank interest rates for loans for house purchase went down from 5.4 percent to 2.9 percent during the same period.
Nevertheless, low central bank rates do not have the same kind of impact for enterprises and households throughout the euro area. In the euro-area crisis countries, enterprises have, on average, poorer financing conditions than in Germany. This is due chiefly to the quality of bank balance sheets, but it also has to do with the fact that, on account of the economic situation, lending in those countries involves higher risks.  Even so, the financing conditions in most of the crisis countries is significantly better than it was before the crisis.
What is clear, however, is that an ultra easy interest rate policy is no substitute for structural adjustments, which are needed in some euro-area countries in order to overcome the economic crisis in the long term. This is where the onus is on the member states themselves. Policymakers should not just sit back and rely on low interest rates to take effect. That is one inherent risk of expansionary monetary policy that we have to keep an eye on.
More than ever, now that the structural adjustment process is starting to bear fruit in a number of countries, it is all the more important not to succumb to "reform fatigue" or to backtrack on reforms that have already been announced. That goes especially for the large euro-area economies which have a particular responsibility for the single currency area.
The progress made in the adjustment process is shown by the fact that the euro-area’s downward economic spiral has now been stopped. The indicators lead us to expect that euro-area gross domestic product showed an increase during the summer months, too. Germany played a part in that as well.
The upturn in Germany is stable, capacity utilisation is at a normal level and is likely to enjoy above-potential economic growth next year.
With this in mind, many observers see interest rates, from a purely German perspective, as being at an inappropriately low level.
Allow me to make the following comments.
1. The Governing Council makes monetary policy for the euro area as a whole, not for individual countries. In a large economic area, there are always periods in which the monetary policy interest rate level is too low or too high. Roughly ten years ago, for example, we were conducting a debate on interests rates being too high. Wolfgang Clement, who was Federal Minister of Economics at the time, bemoaned a German "sacrifice to stability".
2. Monetary policy cannot itself put in place all the preconditions for a stable currency. Given a single monetary policy, other policy areas have to deal with the differences between countries if these become a problem. Fiscal policymakers could respond to signs of macroeconomic overheating in a particular country by speeding up the consolidation of public finances, for example.
Let me now move on to talk about the impact of this period of low interest rates on public finances.
In Germany, public finances benefit not only from rising tax revenue thanks to quite favourable economic conditions, they are also benefiting from declining interest rates. Here, however, a development is persisting, which began long before the onset of the crisis.
In the early 1990s, the average interest payment on German public debt was 8 percent, by 2007 this had fallen to 4.3 percent, and last year it stood at just 3.1 percent.
If we take the average rate of interest for 2007 as a yardstick, the German Treasury is saving more than €26 billion per year.
Thanks to Germany’s good credit standing, central government, in particular, is benefiting from the global search for particularly safe and liquid investments. Some therefore see the German Treasury as a winner in the crisis. I see things differently.
One factor to be considered here, for instance, is that other euro-area countries are also taking advantage of the low interest rates.
Last year, average interest on sovereign debt was lower in all the euro-area countries, including Italy, Spain, Portugal, Ireland and Greece, than it was in 2007 and certainly lower than at the start of monetary union. This development was partly supported by the government assistance programmes, however. In some countries, such as in France and the Netherlands, the average interest on sovereign debt is even lower than in Germany, owing to shorter maturities.
Furthermore, the substantial fiscal risks that Germany, together with a number of other countries, took on in connection with the stabilisation measures, must also be taken into consideration.
In any event, it would be unwise from a fiscal policy perspective to channel these interest rate savings and the current favourable conditions for public finances directly into additional expenditure.
Rather, the fiscal policy leeway should be used to speed up the consolidation of public finances, not least to achieve a sufficient safety margin with respect to the strict national budget rules. This is, in effect, just like crash barriers on roads, from which it is advisable to keep a safe distance.
Especially in light of the burdens expected to result from demographic change in the coming decades, the government debt ratio needs to be rapidly reduced in good time. A forward-thinking approach is advisable not only for drivers, but for fiscal policymakers, too.
At the international level, however, Germany is repeatedly called on to ease its fiscal policy stance, particularly with a view to reducing Germany’s current account surplus. I personally do not believe that this argument holds water: the euro-area crisis countries would barely reap any benefits from an expansionary fiscal policy stance in Germany and the positive spill-over effects would be negligible.
Furthermore, the current account balances between euro-area countries have shifted significantly in recent years. Germany still has a large current account surplus, yet this is largely vis-à-vis countries outside of the euro area. Its surplus vis-à-vis the euro area roughly halved between 2009 and 2012.
Growing demand for German products is therefore primarily coming from non-euro-area countries and these exports are also stabilising the euro-area partner countries, also as a result of greater import demand from Germany.
Making the competitiveness of German enterprises worse or setting off a debt-financed flash in the pan cannot be the answer to Germany’s high current account surpluses. The solution can only be to eliminate the competitive gaps in the deficit countries and to ensure that growth in Germany is placed on a broad footing.
But now let’s return to our main topic of low interest rates, where the old saying goes: one man’s joy is another man’s sorrow.
For savers, the low rates of interest paid on credit balances are annoying in many respects, especially in the case of shorter-term investments where the rate of inflation is often higher than the rate of interest. On balance, any money that is saved therefore loses purchasing power.
There is even talk of a "creeping dispossession of German savers", and I can understand these concerns. For me, it is therefore important to ensure that negative real interest rates do not go on forever and that monetary policy is not held to ransom by politicians or by the financial markets.
There is no specific discrimination of German savers, however. Any saver currently wishing to invest money with a minimum of risk has to live with a low – or even negative – real rate of interest, which is also the case in Italy or Spain, for instance.
Moreover, the very objective of an expansionary monetary policy is to strengthen short-term demand forces. Figuratively speaking, this entails temporarily steering savers towards increased spending and greater investment. Accordingly, the saving ratio in Germany is currently at its lowest level since the beginning of 2002.
As a business person or home-builder who gets a cheaper loan, or as an employee whose job would be put at risk if the crisis were to escalate, or as a shareholder in a firm, members of the general public are indeed benefiting from the low-interest-rate environment, which is placing a strain on them as savers.
The interest rate cuts during the crisis and the generous supply of liquidity have also helped to stabilise the financial system in the short-term. Nevertheless, the low-interest-rate setting also presents challenges for banks.
Declining margins increase the pressure on earnings. This is of particular relevance for the German banking system, as here, the low-interest-rate environment is confronted with a long-standing structural weakness in earnings performance.
As is clearly revealed in our Financial Stability Review – which, by the way, is going to be presented tomorrow – the interest margin, which shows net interest income in relation to the balance sheet total of banks, has been showing a trend decline for many years. In a low-interest-rate environment, the interest margin is coming under further pressure, as competitiveness between institutions ensures, for instance, that interest rates paid on deposits are not further lowered to the same extent as in a normal interest rate environment.
However, German banks rely to a particular degree on this net interest income. For savings banks and credit cooperatives, in particular, the net interest income resulting from deposit and lending business is their most important source of earnings.
The weaker banks’ profitability is, the more difficult it is for them to build up a capital buffer. A lower level of equity capital is associated with greater susceptibility to economic problems, however.
Banks also need to keep an eye on interest rate risk, which arises in the event of rising money market and capital market interest rates when interest expenditure rises faster than interest income.
This is due to maturity transformation. Bank deposit rates generally have a shorter maturity than the loans that they issue and therefore react more quickly to changes in the key interest rates. The topic of interest rate risk will therefore also be on the agenda in the forthcoming ECB balance sheet assessment.
The main priority is therefore to address the problem of the structural erosion of profitability in the German banking system, say, by carrying out a rigorous control of costs.
Even more than for the banks, the low-interest-rate setting is presenting a particular challenge for insurance companies.
Life insurers, in particular, are finding it increasingly difficult to generate the promised guaranteed returns, especially as they are – with good reason – conservative investors. A further negative factor is the obligation to distribute temporary valuation reserves if contracts are terminated prematurely.
Against this backdrop, legislators have a responsibility to create a sound and sustainable regulatory framework for policyholders’ participation in the valuation reserves. In any event, insurers should not get involved in the "search for yield".
In other market segments, however, low interest rates and abundant liquidity have resulted in exactly that: investors are taking greater risks in return for higher yields.
This, however, increases the risk of overexaggerations and overvaluations in individual market segments, such as in the markets for loans to enterprises.
The further market valuations deviate from the prices justified by the fundamentals, the greater is the potential that exists for correction, such as in the event of a turnaround in interest rates.
The risk which is without a doubt currently the subject of the most intense debate in Germany at present is the effect of low interest rates on the housing market.
A few weeks ago, an analysis of this topic in our Monthly Report caused a major stir. We noted that housing prices have increased significantly since 2010, with prices in major cities recording the highest growth.
The favourable financing conditions are likely to have been one reason why many households are considering buying property. This turnaround on the housing market has been due, in part, to favourable labour market developments in recent years and the improved underlying sentiment of consumers.
The very low returns on alternative investments are also one of the reasons why residential property is becoming more attractive as a form of investment again. The quest for a crisis-proof investment, known as "concrete gold", has boosted demand for freehold apartments, in particular.
So far, price hikes have been concentrated on property markets in urban areas. Property in these areas could be overvalued by between 5 percent and 10 percent at present. In the seven major German cities, prices could be anything up to 20 percent higher than the level justified by the fundamentals.
At the micro level, investors are consequently being exposed to the risk of potential price corrections. There are, however, no indications that current developments are giving rise to any macroeconomic risks or risks to financial stability.
This is also indicated by the fact that there has been no excessive build-up of household debt behind this development. Furthermore, mortgage lending in Germany still tends to be rather conservative and there has even been a tendency towards tightening lending standards in recent years. Compared with other countries, property buyers in Germany invest a lot of their own capital, and interest rate lock-in periods are typically long, which means that buyers are not directly affected by changes in interest rates.
The price rises of the past few years are partly due to the fact that supply has been unable to keep up with demand. Further growth is required in the construction of multiple-family houses, in particular.
More will be built, however, only when investors perceive enough yield potential. That also has to be taken into account in the debate on the statutory amount by which rents can be increased.
Ladies and gentlemen
As you can see, the policy of low interest rates has all kinds of repercussions. It boosts the economy, but it also entails risks and side-effects.
The crisis in the euro area is not yet over and the economic recovery is still fragile. In the view of the ECB Governing Council, price pressure in the euro area is likely to be more subdued in the medium term than previously assumed. With that in mind, the Governing Council cut key interest rates again recently, thereby reaffirming its expectation that they will not go up again for some time to come.
Even though an expansionary monetary policy stance is justified against the backdrop of the outlook for prices, this must not divert attention from the many challenges posed by the low-interest-rate environment.
The risks and side-effects start to gain traction mainly when the medicine of low interest rates becomes a long-term therapy, while the effectiveness of the extremely low interest rates declines, the longer they persist.
At all events, we central bankers are well advised not to overestimate our capabilities. Our benchmark is not enjoy the "popularity of rock stars". What counts in the end is fulfilling our mandate to maintain price stability.
Thank you for your attention. I am now looking forward to the questions from Sandra Maischberger and Udo van Kampen.

