I am delighted to have been invited to speak to you today, here in the Hôtel de Beauharnais.
The Hôtel de Beauharnais is generally held to be the finest of residences for a German ambassador, and a dream destination for all diplomats. But it is more than that: it is also a place where German and French history come together in a remarkable fashion. Amongst other things, the Hôtel de Beauharnais played host to Napoleon I, served as the seat of the Prussian legation from 1818, and later became the German embassy.
Today, it is one of the best-preserved reminders of the Napoleonic era, replete with artistic treasures, whilst also symbolising Franco-German friendship, without which there would be no European integration.
This year, we are commemorating two milestones in the history of this friendship. Two weeks ago, a celebration was held in Berlin to mark 25 years of the Franco-German Financial and Economic Council. And 50 years ago, on 22 January, Charles de Gaulle and Konrad Adenauer signed the Franco-German Treaty of Friendship, or Elysée Treaty.
Mr de Gaulle himself was sceptical about friendship between countries: in his opinion, there was “no such thing as friendship between states, only alliances”. However, based on my own impressions from being in France, I believe he was mistaken.
Of course, stereotypes are bandied about with relish on both sides. According to a recent survey, the French mainly regard the Germans as earnest, work-mad and thrifty. The German poet Kurt Tucholsky found in 1924 that the French were well ahead of the Germans in this regard, remarking that “what makes life so very pleasant is the sense of lightness: from the cuisine to the exchange of opinion, things have content without weighing one down”.
However, the statistics point up more similarities than differences. True, the savings rate in Germany, at 16.5 percent, is a little higher than France’s at 15.7 percent. And those with full-time jobs in Germany do actually work somewhat longer hours. However, more people also work part-time. So the average working week in France is actually longer overall. Fiscal consolidation is supported by most people in both countries: while 67 percent approve in Germany, as many as 81 percent are in favour in France.
On closer inspection, the stereotypes on either side are perhaps an expression of what Freud called the “vanity of small differences” – France and Germany are actually more alike than people would sometimes like to believe.
That also applies to notions about what the economy should do for society. Despite all the differences of detail, a basic consensus prevails in Germany and France – as in the rest of Europe – on what constitutes the “European model”: the combination of market efficiency and social equity, of freedom and protection. To quote Jacques Delors: “The European economic model has to be based on three principles: competition which stimulates, cooperation which strengthens, and solidarity which unites.” In Germany, this model is called a social market economy.
The two principles of competition and solidarity do not always co-exist in easy harmony, and the relative weight which lawmakers and the general public attach to them varies both over time and from country to country. Nonetheless, the European model has proved to be a success story over the last 50 years.
However, the financial and sovereign debt crisis has deeply unsettled people. They wonder whether the European model can still hold and whether it can ensure sustainable economic growth.
Europe is a union of sovereign states. And sovereignty means that it is the job of each and every country to lay and secure the foundations for sustainable growth – and to decide how that is best achieved.
At the same time, however, Europe is a community in which one member’s economic wellbeing or distress affects all the others. Europe is only strong if its constituent parts are strong. That is exactly how I understand Article 121 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, which stipulates that member states shall regard their economic policies as a matter of common concern.
This common concern has a particular bearing on the economic and monetary union. After all, when the members the ECB Executive Board and the 17 governors of the national central banks sit down together on the ECB Governing Council to discuss common monetary policy, they must be guided by one yardstick only, and that is price stability in the euro area as a whole.
It is a matter for member states to ensure that their economies not only make use of the opportunities presented by a single currency, but are also up to the challenges associated with it. Thus, a stable currency not only requires a monetary policy approach which is focused clearly on price stability – a sound economic basis in the member states is also essential.
That is the reason why, as President of the Bundesbank, I would like to speak to you here in Paris today about how sustainable economic growth in Europe might be achieved.
In my view, there are three fundamental challenges, three basic prerequisites  for sustainable growth in Europe and they are: stability, demography and competitiveness. These are what I would like to talk about today.
The erosion of trust in the sustainability of government finances has pushed Europe to the brink. A number of countries are faced with ageing populations and have to make suitable adjustments – Germany is a good example. And a lack of competitiveness means that some countries are registering slower economic growth than they otherwise might. France is one of the countries having an intense debate about this.
If we are to counter the crisis in confidence effectively, we need to meet these three challenges. I would first like to turn to the question of government finances.
The benefit of stable government finances is generally recognised. They provide room for manoeuvre without burdening future generations. However, there are differing opinions as to the pace at which fiscal consolidation should be pursued.
Recently, the view that sluggish growth is being caused by excessive austerity has gained ground. And it is a fact that consolidation can hamper growth temporarily. No one would argue otherwise.
But we should recall that for countries which were no longer able to access the capital market, fiscal consolidation was not a matter of choice but an outright necessity. We also need to be aware that, without European assistance, the necessary adjustments would have been significantly sharper and more painful.
On the question of the extent to which consolidation hampers growth, a number of factors come into play. Some empirical studies indicate that, in a phase of economic weakness, the negative impact on growth may tend to be greater. On the other hand, there is broad consensus that a high level of debt has negative consequences for growth. That is particularly the case if the monies borrowed are used to finance current expenditure rather than public sector investment.
As the debt level increases, investors demand higher interest to compensate for the risk of default. When this happens, it is crucial to enhance the credibility of the borrowing government, as IMF chief economist Olivier Blanchard recently re-emphasised. Viewing consolidation only as something to do in the future will not elicit the necessary confidence.
In this connection, I wish expressly to acknowledge that France has reduced its structural deficit by around one percentage point a year over the last three years. However, in view of the continuing challenges in fiscal policy, I regard it as a must that the existing deficit reduction rules be adhered to. The credibility of the rules should not be jeopardised by fully exhausting their flexibility the first time one is put to the test.
At the risk of reinforcing the stereotypes mentioned at the beginning, let me say that, in my view, excessive flexibility in fiscal policy does more harm than good. Let us remember that watering down the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact in 2005 helped to create the fiscal problems we are now up against.
Ladies and gentlemen
An ageing population requires far-reaching changes, as the example of Germany very clearly shows. Not accounting for migration, there will be one and a half million people fewer on the labour market in 2020. The percentage of the total population in employment is therefore on the decline. A decrease such as this would lower annual potential growth by just under 0.3 percentage point.
What can we do to counteract this fall in the standard of living? We must do three things in particular: we must make family life and working life more compatible. We must progressively extend the average working life over the next few years. And we must increase investment in education and training.
Of course, the first steps towards improving the compatibility of work and family life must be taken by companies themselves. However, it is also important to establish an adequate childcare infrastructure. France is a step ahead of Germany in this respect. This can also been seen in the fact that more young mothers are employed in France than in Germany.
However, simply making family life and work life more compatible is not enough to maintain or even improve the standard of living in an ageing society. If we wish to keep pension contributions stable and avoid a significant reduction in the pension level, workers will have to retire slightly later on average.
Germany has taken an important step in this direction by changing the pension age to 67.Compared to a pension age of 65, this will mean that 2.7 million more people will be of working age in 2030.Calls to reverse this reform therefore worry me, because if life expectancy continues to rise, we will have to think about taking the reform further instead.
“Since we are living longer, we should also work slightly longer,” said President Hollande last week. Despite its comparatively favourable demographics, France therefore also faces the challenge of maintaining its standard of living. The employment rate among 60 to 64 year-olds is not even half as high in France as it is in Germany.
We also need to invest more in human skills. In an ageing society, in particular, it is important to develop each individual to their full potential. We must therefore ensure that gaps in children’s and young people’s education do not appear in the first place. And it must be possible to adapt to changing labour demands through lifelong learning. Although the OECD has confirmed that Germany has recently made progress in improving educational achievement on average, this success still depends heavily on an individual’s socioeconomic background.
In addition, structural reforms in the services sector may provide further growth impetus. Since the outbreak of the crisis, opening up access to closed professions has often been discussed as a proposal for increasing productivity in the crisis countries. However, it is not only the crisis countries which need to take action. In a cross-country comparison, the OECD found that the services sector in Germany is particularly strictly regulated.
There are good reasons for regulating service professions, especially from the perspective of consumer protection. But overly strict regulation can restrict market access and weaken competition. Reforms in this area may therefore have a significant impact, boosting investment, productivity and wages alike.
By contrast, the current account surplus would be reduced if reforms focused on non-tradable services. Structural reforms in the services sector would thus allow Germany to contribute towards the adjustment process in the euro area.
Ladies and gentlemen, managing trade flows through policies, on the other hand, would cement Europe's problems rather than solving them. I would like to re-emphasise this point here, in the building commissioned by Jean-Baptiste Colbert’s nephew. In many areas, such as encouraging migration from other European countries, Colbert’s reforms were exemplary. Yet his ideas in the field of foreign trade are not something we should take to heart.
To make Europe more competitive again, we need reforms that tackle the root of the problem. And by that I mean reforms of the services sectors and not only of the labour market.
Flexible labour markets help companies to adapt to rapidly changing conditions. This is not only important during downturns; it encourages growth momentum overall. When small business start-ups bring an idea to market and grow on the back of that idea, this is often also a form of progress.
Take, for instance, the development of a new artificial heart by Carmat, a company which went public in 2008. For once, this confirms a cliché: after all, the French are said to be experts in matters of the heart.
But in many European countries, there are major obstacles hindering growth in the corporate sector. Once companies reach certain staffing levels, they are suddenly subject to a wide range of different regulations. It is therefore sometimes more convenient for companies not to expand despite good market opportunities.
These obstacles significantly weaken growth momentum. Removing them boosts competitiveness. And it boosts the younger generation’s chances, in particular, of finally finding a foothold on the labour market, which, in some respects, is even more important.
The labour markets are currently often split in two: on the one hand, there are those with regular employment contracts which offer them a high degree of security; on the other, there are those who cannot access the labour market because companies are reluctant to recruit due to a lack of flexibility.
In contrast to the “flexicurity” model favoured by the Scandinavian countries, Germany’s approach is based on “internal” flexibility. The flexible use of working time accounts allows employees to build up credit when times are good, which can then be depleted during slower spells. This avoids having to make workers redundant.
The in-house agreements designed to safeguard employment, which were signed by German trade unions and employers as part of the “Pforzheim agreement” in 2004, for example, work according to this principle. The constructive role played by the trade unions in Germany was thus key to restoring competitiveness.
Studies indicate that these very arrangements go a long way towards explaining Germany’s “labour market miracle” during the recent recession. Through its recently adopted labour market reform, France has taken a major step towards achieving internal flexibility. I am convinced that this flexibility will benefit both companies and their employees. And I am convinced that these reforms send out an important message: that Europe is addressing the deeper causes of the crisis.
However, boosting competitiveness remains a major challenge for France, which has lost a seventh of its world market share in the past five years. Its “National Pact for Growth, Competitiveness and Employment” is therefore a further step in the right direction.
Finally, I would like to turn to the role of the central banks in resolving the crisis. The causes of the crisis are structural. This is why only structural measures can resolve the crisis. It is true that monetary policymakers, that is, the Eurosystem, have already done a great deal to contain the crisis.
The Eurosystem has cut interest rates, is providing the banks with practically unlimited amounts of liquidity, and has intervened on the sovereign bond markets. Through these measures, the Eurosystem has helped to curb the crisis. As you know, some of these measures are not uncontroversial.
However, monetary policy cannot resolve the crisis. We are unanimous on this on the ECB’s Governing Council. Instead, the burden of unsound budgetary policy is being shared between all euro-area countries through the purchase of sovereign bonds from countries which had difficulty issuing their bonds to the market. And responsibility for deciding on such burden-sharing measures should lie only with elected parliaments, not independent central banks.
The Eurosystem has bought the European governments time in which to solve the crisis. The governments and parliaments now need to use this time well, because monetary policy measures are not without risks and side-effects.
Ladies and gentlemen
Growth is the key to resolving the crisis. This is something upon which we all agree. But backsliding on consolidation will not bring us any closer to this goal. Monetary policy cannot resolve the crisis either.
Instead, we need to find ways to respond to the key challenges facing the European model: an ageing population and a lack of competitiveness. Both challenges require profound changes. But moving more towards a market economy does not necessarily mean less security; quite the opposite.
At the end of the day, European countries are not only the architects of their own success, but also influence the outcome of European integration as a whole. Germany and France have a particular responsibility in this respect, not least because of their economic importance in Europe. The situation is like a rowing boat: unless both individuals row at the same pace, the boat will spin in circles instead of moving forward.

