I am pleased to have been invited back to take part in this year's Süddeutsche Zeitung conference for business leaders. This year's event does not take the form of a "cross-examination", but I will nonetheless be more than glad to field your questions after my speech.
Last Thursday's Süddeutsche Zeitung ran a headline which read "Weidmann exercises restraint". Now I'm not sure whether this headline was expressing relief or disappointment. That is probably something which lies in the eye of the beholder.
That monetary policy is attracting so much public attention around the world, and that stories on the work and internal affairs of central banks are to be found not just towards the back of the business section but on page one, undoubtedly owes something to the financial and sovereign debt crisis.
The general public have come to realise how powerful the central banks' instruments are, they can see that central banks are coming under growing pressure to take on more and more tasks, and they are pinning their hopes on central bank action or worrying about what risks and side-effects that might entail.
When the euro-area crisis came to a head, some observers even regarded the ECB as the only body in the euro area which was capable of taking action, equipped as it was with a toolkit of instruments for combating the crisis, some of which seem to have so much firepower that the media often liken them to weapons of war.
In a nutshell, a great deal of action has been taken but European monetary policy is still mired in crisis mode. In its efforts to mitigate the economic repercussions of the crisis, the ECB's Governing Council has not only dramatically cut its policy rates since the onset of the crisis but also rolled out a host of non-standard monetary policy measures.
Banks can still obtain as much liquidity as they wish, and for as long as necessary, provided they have sufficient collateral. It is said that this full allotment policy has been providing a safety net for solvent banks ever since the onset of the financial crisis. At the same time, the quality criteria for monetary policy collateral were successively relaxed, while the residual maturity of refinancing operations was substantially extended to just over a year at present, compared with less than a month on average before the crisis erupted.
The Eurosystem has also acquired the sovereign bonds of crisis countries and covered bank bonds. The idea behind stabilising certain segments of the capital market was to safeguard the transmission of monetary policy stimuli. 
But in my view, some of these crisis measures have excessively blurred the boundaries between monetary and fiscal policy. Some of the Eurosystem's measures, at least, are at the outer edge of its mandate. This action attracted public scrutiny and also prompted a debate over the mandate itself.
You don't need me to tell you that other central banks, too, have not just dramatically cut their own policy rates but also engaged in quantitative easing by buying up substantial volumes of government bonds. The Bank of England, for instance, now holds around 27 percent of outstanding British debt, while the US Fed's share is as much as around 23 percent.
These purchases do not, of course, entail the problems which make government bond purchases such a contentious issue in the euro area. This is because in the euro area, purchases of bonds, particularly those of countries with a poor credit rating, result in solvency risks being redistributed among taxpayers in the individual member countries. But this is essentially not provided for under the no bail-out clause contained in the monetary union's existing regulatory framework. Decisions on the distribution of liability risks should be taken, if at all, by national parliaments and governments.
But is it not incongruous to debate the central banks' mandate, or the scope and limits of monetary policy, if the measures themselves stand a chance of helping the situation? After all, the fire brigade doesn't discuss the (possible) damage caused by extinguishing a fire while it is still tackling the blaze!
Putting aside, for a moment, the question as to which of the policymakers ought to, or is allowed to, quench the flames, I consider these valid debates which we should engage in. I don't know about you, but I would like the fire brigade to consider the right extinguishing equipment before tackling a blaze, and I would like to have the peace of mind that extinguishing the flames will not cause more damage than the fire itself. That is, a situation in which the firefighters may have extinguished the blaze, but their water has trickled into the house's foundations, rendering the building structurally unsound.
It is for this very reason that we are engaged in such an intense debate in the ECB's Governing Council on the right strategy for resolving the crisis. Such debates should be seen not as a decision-making body's weakness but as one of its strengths. Other central banks are likewise striving to gauge the right course of action. And by publishing minutes shortly after their meetings, they offer the general public an even greater degree of involvement than is granted at euro-area level.
That is why there are also some voices in the euro area calling for the minutes of Governing Council meetings to be made public. In my view, publishing minutes in which the lines of argumentation put forward in the debate are clearly identifiable would be a step towards improving the public's understanding of the manner in which the ECB's Governing Council makes monetary policy decisions. They should be published quickly, that is, before the next monetary policy meeting takes place.
Thoroughly explaining a central bank's workings is particularly important in cases where the central bank is an independent authority. The absence of political control makes it all the more important, first, for the central bank to have a specific mandate and, second, for the general public to be able to follow its decisions. Transparency can help to bolster trust. And trust is the most valuable asset that central banks possess.
Central bank independence is a special feature of democratic systems, which is why it always needs to be justified at great length.
Independence, for me, places a clear onus on central banks to interpret their monetary policy mandate narrowly if need be. This is the only way to prevent their independence from being curtailed on grounds of a perceived lack of democracy. This would jeopardise the long-term goal of safeguarding price stability.
Borrowing from Jean-Jacques Rousseau's definition of freedom, it can be said that central bank independence does not give the central bank a licence to do as it pleases; it means that it is not forced to do what it does not want to and what it is not allowed to do.
The measures taken by central banks to tackle the crisis are already raising doubts in the international debate as to whether independent central banks which are mandated to safeguard price stability are even a modern phenomenon in the first place. Stephen King, chief economist at HSBC – not, I might add, the author of the same name – has already gone on record to say that the era of independent central banks is over.
Criticism is being raised from two corners. From those who believe that central banks have already become too embroiled in the crisis, and from those who are calling on central banks to play an even greater role in other policy areas.
Some economists, like the American John B Taylor, assert that monetary policy has already overstepped the mark and ought to be restrained. In essence, this is consistent with the views of Milton Friedman, who once famously said that "money is much too serious a matter to be left to the central bankers" and called for monetary policy to be strictly rules-based.
The other corner is represented by Joseph E Stiglitz, Nobel Laureate in economics, who said that central banks looking to set their objectives should not confine themselves to targeting inflation but also focus on employment, growth and financial stability, adding that monetary policy needed to be aligned with fiscal policy.
From the euro area's perspective, these demands – the like of which are occasionally voiced by European policymakers as well – could be countered by stating that in the monetary union, the independence of the Eurosystem and the primacy of price stability are enshrined in the European treaties – as is the ban on Eurosystem funding for European institutions or individual member states.
I am stressing these rules and arrangements not because of what might be perceived as a German tendency to harp on about principles, nor to safeguard the "Bundesbank's legacy". No, I am doing so for sound economic reasons. After all, there is a single monetary policy and 17, soon to be 18, independent national fiscal policies. So which fiscal master should monetary policy serve?
In other words, the Maastricht Treaty is based on the principle of national responsibility. Key national policy areas remain national matters, so liability for the consequences of these policies should also stay at the national level. This principle of liability is crucially important for monetary union. Undermining it might allow the incentives to incur debt to gain the upper hand, making it difficult to maintain the monetary union as a union of stability.
The failure of this regulatory framework to avert the crisis was only partly due to gaps which the founders of monetary union had overlooked – gaps which are severely impairing the stability of the euro area – like, for instance, the creeping erosion of competitiveness in some countries, excessive debt levels not just in the public sector but in the private sector as well, insufficient financial market regulation and lax banking supervision.
The difficulties surrounding the regulatory framework were also caused by a failure to honour agreements. This is particularly evident in the field of fiscal policy. Even before the onset of the financial crisis, in 2007, six of the then 16 euro-area countries were running fiscal deficits of more than 3 percent, despite the rules set out in the Stability and Growth Pact. The deficit target was violated particularly often by the major member states, with Germany, at six breaches, faring only slightly better than France and Italy, at eight and nine breaches respectively. In most countries, government debt ratios, far from being well below the 60 percent threshold, were still significantly higher in some cases.
For me, the way in which member states dealt with the fiscal rules clearly demonstrates that the regulatory framework of monetary union and the manner in which decision-makers apply the rules cannot be viewed in isolation. Member states undoubtedly gave what they thought were compelling grounds for each violation of the fiscal rules. If need be, the culprits only had to claim that the measures were necessary to prevent economic problems from coming to a head.
But one thing can be said for both monetary and fiscal policy – every crisis measure increases the risk of moving further away from the original regulatory framework. That is particularly true for the crisis measures which, to all intents and purposes, broadened the scope of mutual liability.
That makes it all the more important to bolster the existing operational framework and to attach renewed importance to the principle of national responsibility.
Another option would be to make greater mutual liability conditional on greater mutual control. Thus, the member states would ultimately have to be prepared to relinquish national sovereign rights to the European level and thus combine the existing monetary union with a fiscal union, say.
This would necessitate a transfer of national sovereign rights to the European level, but I do not currently see any broad support for this in the member states – neither among policymakers nor the general public.
There is one area of responsibility, though, which is to be shifted to the European level as part of the banking union – that of supervising roughly 130 significant banks across the euro area. But this, too, is an area in which a balance needs to be struck between liability and control. While it is true that the banking union will mean sharing responsibility for future misalignments, liability should only be mutualised for developments caused by factors that lie outside the sphere of national policymakers. So there are good reasons for retaining a substantial share of national liability. After all, the single recovery and resolution mechanism is essentially designed to primarily bail in the owners and creditors of ailing banks.
Monetary policy constantly has to navigate the tensions between the regulatory framework and other policy areas, notably fiscal, financial market and structural policy.
This means that a central bank whose monetary policy strategy is based on price stability cannot create the setting in which it operates. Sound public finances, stable financial systems and growth-friendly structural policy are vital for it to achieve its objective on a lasting basis – and without any frictions.
A central bank's monetary policy stance can only be transmitted smoothly to the real economy if politicians have removed all obstacles to this transmission mechanism – by ensuring that their fiscal policy does not generate excessive government debt and thus drive up long-term interest rates, for example. Equally, of course, monetary policy affects fiscal policy too. If monetary policymakers raise the policy rate, this leads, among other things, to higher interest expenses for public budgets.
No-one would dispute the fact that monetary policy can stimulate economic activity in the short run. In the long run, however, this stimulus inevitably comes at the cost of rising inflation. Ensuring price stability is therefore the best way for central banks to contribute to long-term economic growth. In the end, the structure of an economy – and, in particular, the productivity of its enterprises and employees – is the main factor which determines its growth potential.
According to the Tinbergen Norm, each economic policy objective requires at least one separate tool. A courier who has to transport packages to four completely different locations and has only one van won't be able to deliver them all at once.
Some even talk of a "new trilemma" facing central banks – the task of reconciling the objectives of price stability, sustainable public debt and a stable financial system.
Admittedly, traditional – or conventional – monetary policy alone cannot, in the long run, achieve all three objectives at the same time, as it only has one tool: the central bank policy rate.
And even unconventional monetary policy measures, such as supplying the banking sector with liquidity over a very long period or announcing forward guidance expressing the expectation that the policy rate will not be raised in the foreseeable future, cannot eliminate this problem. Their contribution to monetary policy is that they remain effective when a central bank has run out of options in interest rate policy, either because interest rates are already very low or because the interest rate stance is not being transmitted.
Given the tensions I've described and the limited options available to monetary policymakers, I believe we need a clear hierarchy of monetary policy objectives. Monetary policy can contribute to financial stability but, where aims come into conflict with one another, the objective of price stability must take priority – as is specified in the Eurosystem's mandate.
But that doesn't mean that central banks can't play a key role in ensuring a stable financial system.
The central banks of the EU member states have been members of the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) for some years now, and are thus heavily involved in monitoring financial stability in Europe. The ESRB can issue warnings and recommendations if threats to financial stability arise.
And the Bundesbank was given a macroprudential mandate in Germany at the start of this year. It now has the ongoing task of analysing factors that are key to financial stability and identifying risks which may impair financial stability. Where appropriate, it prepares proposals on how to avert these risks.
In addition, the task of supervising significant banks will be transferred to the European Central Bank in just under a year from now. The ECB will then bear crucial responsibility for the stability of significant banks in the euro area.
But again, these tasks have to be kept separate from monetary policy. In the end, though, the existing legal framework will not allow a strict separation of the two areas of work, as the ECB Governing Council will bear ultimate responsibility for both monetary policy and banking supervision.
Of course, it would be naive to ignore the interdependence that already exists between the various policy areas.
Central banks have the fundamental ability to fund public debt – either by granting loans to the government or by purchasing government bonds directly – and that fact alone already creates certain points of contact between fiscal and monetary policy.
Exorbitant financing of the government by the central bank ultimately expands banks' possibilities for money creation. In the end, this monetary financing can drive up inflation.
If, in reality, a central bank has no option but to shore up the government's solvency and can no longer ensure price stability, then – if not before – this is considered a situation of dangerous fiscal dominance.
The Eurosystem's independence, which is enshrined in the EU Treaties, and the ban on monetary financing are both intended to avert this danger.
But there is another route to fiscal dominance: a central bank could come under pressure to use a lax interest rate policy to achieve higher inflation and thus stabilise the real value of rising public debt. This would amount to a devaluation of nominal government debt via an inflation-friendly monetary policy stance.
If people expect a central bank to succumb to pressure from fiscal policymakers once public debt has reached a certain level, they will already factor that into their current inflation expectations and increase them accordingly. Sooner or later, that will push up the actual inflation rate – via higher wage settlements, for example.
Of course, the ECB Governing Council unanimously opposes a higher inflation target. All of its members are fully committed to the objective of ensuring price stability as it is currently defined.
Yet it is crucial to avoid raising even the slightest suspicion that shoring up government solvency might be prioritised over monetary policy – by keeping the policy rate low for longer than is strictly necessary to achieve price stability, for example, or by making vast government bond purchases because governments' solvency problems and their effects on bond yields are viewed as a monetary policy problem.
To inspire confidence in central banks as independent guardians of price stability, it is crucial that we follow the example of the first President of the ECB, Wim Duisenberg. Asked how he dealt with demands from finance ministers, he replied, "I hear them, but I don't listen".
The ban on monetary financing and the independence of the central bank therefore do not exist merely for their own sake. They have a firm grounding in economic theory, but they are also based on the lessons of history.
And I'm thinking less of Germany's experiences of inflation during the first half of the 20th century than the lessons we've learned from the 1970s and 1980s. Back then, central banks around the world acted at the whim of fiscal policymakers, leading to two-digit inflation rates in some cases.
Italy is a case in point: its central bank was formally considered a public-law institution until 1993. Before its "divorce" from the finance ministry in 1981, the Banca d'Italia had to buy up all government bonds that were left unsold at auctions. That is probably one reason why Italy's inflation rates averaged 12.5 percent in the 1970s. Inflation never fell below 10 percent between 1973 and 1984. It was not until the Banca d'Italia had cut its ties with fiscal policy that it was able to bring inflation down and stabilise the lira.
But we don't have to go as far back as the 1970s to find a country where the central bank acts on politicians' explicit instructions. The three pillars of "Abenomics" are a classic example of the tensions between fiscal, monetary and structural policy. But while the monetary policy stance is already very expansionary, we have seen only a rough sketch of the planned structural adjustments so far.
I believe that monetary policymakers in all the major currency areas must be diligent in ensuring that politicians create the conditions needed for a stable currency, such as reining in government finances or launching necessary structural reforms. Otherwise, central banks risk being held to ransom by politicians.
On a similar note, I would like to remind you of the words of Peter Ustinov, who once said that those who you see today putting something off to tomorrow are the same people who already put the same thing off yesterday.
During the financial crisis, central banks provided commercial banks with a vast supply of funds to counteract liquidity shortages trigged by the crisis.
In the euro area, some of these refinancing operations had very long maturities. But we must always keep in mind that the intention is to supply banks with liquidity and not to replace capital market finance.
It is therefore crucial that central bank refinancing operations do not allow structural problems in the banking industry to go unsolved by ruling out the possibility – so vital to a market economy – of banks without any chance of survival exiting the market.  
Yet much the same applies to the risk of financial dominance as to the danger of fiscal dominance: it is imperative that central banks do not create the impression of being responsible for shoring up banks' solvency.
We should design refinancing operations in such a way that they do not encroach on capital market funding; their conditions should not be too generous compared with market conditions. One of the aims of liquidity provision should be to facilitate lending to the private sector. The liquidity should not be used to amass even more government bonds. Yet, as the Bundesbank's November Monthly Report shows, banks in the crisis countries, far from reducing their holdings of government bonds, have accumulated more and more over the past two years.
Ladies and gentlemen,
we need to draw a distinction between central banks' monetary policy tasks and their role as the lender of last resort.  Should temporary liquidity shortages arise, the Eurosystem national central banks can provide banks with emergency liquidity – against collateral and at their own risk.
But here, too, it is vital to ensure that emergency liquidity is only provided for a short length of time – and not at all to overindebted institutions.
The ECB Governing Council recently published rules on granting emergency liquidity assistance. Above all, I see these rules as a kind of safeguard for Eurosystem central banks to shield them from the expectations of banks and the general public regarding overly generous emergency assistance.
To ensure that the Eurosystem is not pressured into rescuing ailing banks in the future, two works in progress need to be completed.
The financial sector must be made more resilient through tougher capital requirements, such as those already adopted under Basel III.
The close ties between governments and banks must be loosened in the euro area. This is the only way to prevent troubled governments from bringing banks down with them and ensure that ailing banks do not push individual governments to the brink of insolvency. The banking union – with its two pillars, the single supervisory mechanism and the single recovery and resolution mechanism – can play a key part in achieving this goal.
In addition, I believe that the preferential treatment of government bonds on bank balance sheets should be abolished. If banks needed the same kind of risk-based capital backing for lending to euro-area governments as they do for other loans, this would curb their appetite for government bonds. And it would also help to discipline the fiscal policy of the countries issuing these bonds.
To minimise the risks posed by the crisis measures to the euro-area operational framework, the monetary policy mandate must be interpreted as narrowly as possible. This is the best way for the Eurosystem to safeguard its independence and would reduce the danger of suspicions of fiscal or financial dominance.
We therefore need to re-establish clear boundaries between monetary and fiscal policy tasks in particular. While monetary policy has some scope to contribute to financial stability, where aims come into conflict with one another the objective of maintaining price stability should take clear priority.
The euro-area crisis is not over yet. There will always be a temptation to misappropriate monetary policy for fiscal policy purposes. But monetary policymakers must stand firm against any such temptations. It is the responsibility of governments and parliaments to solve the crisis. They must take action – and quickly, if need be. They are the only ones with a democratic mandate to take political decisions which may have far-reaching consequences.
Confidence in the Eurosystem's stability strategy is crucial to the success of its monetary policy. Or, in the words of Mario Draghi, "In short, for the ECB responsible leadership has meant being true to our founding Treaty. Staying independent from the voices calling for us to 'do more' or to 'do less'; staying fully focused on our mandate to secure price stability for the citizens of the euro".  I couldn't agree more.

