It gives me great pleasure to be here with you today. Just last year, I myself was a member of the Faculty of Economics and Management at Magdeburg University, and during my short time in Saxony-Anhalt I grew very fond of the university and the town of Magdeburg. I was therefore delighted to accept Mr Strackeljan's invitation to join you in your celebration today. First of all I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate all the award winners.
I would like to preface my remarks on this festive occasion with a note of caution by reminding you that we are facing a number of challenges at the current time. These include the worrying geopolitical developments, the uncertainty about the euro area's future course as well as problems closer to home, such as the financing of our academic centres.
But I would now like to continue on a much more positive note and, at the same time, establish a common denominator between such seemingly disparate challenges. My message is that we need a strong academic - and I explicitly mean university-based - research and teaching capacity to make our country fit for the future. The answers to many of the key political and economic questions that we face can only be found on the basis of clearly structured and comprehensive analyses. Academic research and teaching are the bedrock on which such analyses and diagnoses can develop. And a clear diagnosis is the starting point from which every meaningful political concept must grow.
Scientific analysis as an aid to policymaking is a broad notion that covers a wide range of activities. I would like to concentrate on examples drawn from the field of economics and, more specifically, from my current area of responsibility, namely financial stability.
More than six years have now passed since the most severe economic and financial crisis since the Second World War erupted. The repercussions were and are far-reaching - even for a country such as Germany, which overcame the crisis-related economic slump relatively quickly. In the euro area the fiscal burdens stemming from the euro crisis equalled 10 percent of GDP by the end of 2013 - with bank rescue measures alone accounting for just under 7 percent of GDP. In Germany the figures were even higher, with crisis resolution measures accounting for 12 percent of GDPand bank support measures for 9 percent of GDP. By comparison, Germany's total spending on education and research in 2012 amounted to 4.3 percent of GDP.
These figures graphically illustrate the political importance of seeking to make financial crises less likely and less damaging. The Federal Government consequently entrusted the Bundesbank with a new, macroprudential mandate. At the beginning of 2013, the Bundesbank's brief was thus widened to include a statutory responsibility to contribute towards safeguarding financial stability.
At the European level, the Bundesbank is represented on the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB). The ESRB analyses the stability of the financial system and can issue warnings and recommendations, for example to national governments. This makes sense as decisions about macroprudential measures continue to be made at the national level.
In Germany, macroprudential oversight is coordinated by the German Financial Stability Committee (FSC). Its voting members comprise three representatives each from the Bundesbank, the Federal Financial Supervisory Authority(BaFin) and the Federal Ministry of Finance. The Bundesbank plays a special role in this committee, as it provides analyses and has a right of veto.
But on what analyses and methodological approaches are these committees founded? Many claim that economic research did not produce an adequate response to the crisis, but I do not share that view. There are numerous very promising approaches aimed at gaining a better understanding of how financial crises emerge and possibly even at making them easier to predict. To my mind, however, an even bigger priority is to strengthen the resilience of the financial system and to reduce moral hazard. Modern economic research can make a crucial contribution to this.
Before I move on to explain these aspects in more detail, I would like to define the term “financial stability” more precisely and examine how we can implement this policy goal.
The purpose of macroprudential oversight is to improve the stability of the overall financial system. The easiest way to explain macroprudential oversight is to distinguish it from microprudential supervision, the traditional form of banking supervision. Banking supervisors monitor banks' compliance with the legal provisions applying to banks, which are in place to safeguard the stability of each individual bank. For example, banks must back their credit risk with capital in accordance with certain rules so that they can continue to meet their obligations to creditors also in the event of a loan default.
The financial crisis was a dramatic reminder that the stability of individual banks is no guarantee for the stability of the entire financial system. Disruptions in markets or adverse developments at banks which, taken in isolation, were deemed manageable destabilised large parts of the financial system.
Systemic crises can be generated by contagion effects. These can emerge if direct contractual obligations exist between banks that are essentially sound and others which are experiencing distress. Via these direct channels one bank's problems can spill over to many others in a domino effect.
But there are also indirect contagion channels. Empirical research has shown these are frequently even more significant. Where banks have similar business models or are exposed to the same macroeconomic risk, the entire system can run into distress. If, for instance, securities held by a large number of banks all lose value at the same time, this can spell trouble. And if in such a situation banks are forced to offload these securities, they have to realise the losses resulting from such a fire-sale, which depletes their capital. This, in turn, can trigger a vicious circle comprising a credit crunch for businesses, an economic slump and a surge in defaults, thus necessitating banks to make corresponding write-downs and write-offs. Similar contagion effects can arise if a negative macroeconomic shock hits a number of banks simultaneously.
In order to prevent the economy from getting trapped in such a vicious circle, macroprudential oversight has a broader focus than microprudential supervision. The objective of macroprudential oversight is not to maintain the stability of individual banks, but rather to safeguard the stability of the financial system as a whole. The purpose of financial stability policy is to ensure that the financial system remains capable of performing its macroeconomic functions also in times of crisis. Savers should be able to find suitable investment opportunities, and only those projects should be financed where the return matches the risk. In addition, the payment systems have to function smoothly at all times.
Requiring banks to hold sufficient capital can mitigate the impact of such chain reactions because better capitalised banks can better absorb losses, thereby reducing the likelihood of crises that could destabilise the entire system. This is one reason why higher capital levels play such a key role in regulating banks - and not just in the stability of individual banks. Particularly large banks that are globally highly interconnected need a thick capital buffer. Corresponding proposals for the 30 largest and most important global banks to hold more capital were drawn up by the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and presented to the heads of state or government of the 20 most important industrialised and emerging economics - the G20 leaders - last week.
However, there are other conceivable intervention measures besides capital requirements. Financial crises are the outcome of excessive indebtedness, so directly restricting bank lending or setting specific requirements for credit standards could improve systemic stability.
Macroprudential oversight thus faces a range of major challenges.
Financial stability is an abstract concept. Hence before any meaningful analysis can begin, the abstract objective of a more stable financial system first has to be broken down into a set of measurable indicators. I would like to illustrate this point using an analogy from monetary policy. The mandate of monetary policymakers is to maintain price stability. But, like financial stability, price stability is not something that can be measured directly. For this reason the ECB Governing Council has defined price stability as a growth rate of the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) of below, but close to, 2 percent. That is a quantifiable intermediate objective which can be achieved using the monetary policy toolkit.
A second challenge is that “financial stability” is a rather new policy field. “Financial stability” is often not clearly defined; many instruments still need to be tested; and it is hard to predict what impact many of the measures might have. Will a given measure reduce the threat to financial stability? What evasive action might it trigger? How can we prevent macroprudential policy from being misused as a Trojan horse for market intervention aimed at protecting national markets, economic engineering or income redistribution?
We can only answer these questions if we put in place a clear set of procedures for reviewing and evaluating measures that have been taken. Unlike in the past, we now have new institutions and better data at our disposal.
Macroprudential oversight is now embedded in an international and a European framework. At the international level, the FSB, which I've just mentioned, explores ways in which we can refine our data pool and considers what additional regulatory measures are needed to make the international financial system less vulnerable to risk. I touched upon the institutions in Europe and Germany - the ESRB and the FSC - earlier on in my speech.
The new institutions are complex, and the decision-making machinery has not yet fully clicked into gear in some instances. However, these new bodies represent a decisive step forward. A highly intensive cross-border exchange of information and experience takes place with both the FSB and the ESRB. Standards are being set that the individual countries have to comply with. And the international bodies play a key role in the coordination and evaluation of macroprudential measures.
How can university teaching and economic research help us to make the financial system more stable? I would now like to outline the points that I consider most important in this area.
More than in other policy spheres, the field of financial stability requires knowledge about how microeconomic decisions affect the system as a whole. The sharp distinction that we often draw in teaching and research between the micro and macro levels does not help us to understand the inner dynamics of financial systems.
This interlinkage poses an exciting challenge for both empirical and theoretical work. The accusation that macroeconomists were largely caught off-guard by the crisis is therefore misleading. One could just as well argue that bank management studies did too little to flag up moral hazard stemming from banking regulation.
I think both of these allegations are exaggerated. But it is true that we need to venture beyond the boundaries of our separate disciplines, and I see a number of promising approaches in this respect.
There are many new approaches in macroeconomics which can model the behaviour of heterogeneous banks. The challenge will be to ensure that these models are sufficiently robust in terms of describing the frictions they model. Microeconomic approaches could provide important pointers for how to achieve this. Interestingly, microeconomics has been the source of numerous important proposals for reforming the regulatory system. And the understanding of non-linear effects which can lead to crises is also a new and promising field of research. 
In addition, empirical research is yielding exciting new approaches. For example, information on prices for insurance against credit risk can be used to value the credit quality of an individual entity. These data can be generated from prices for credit default swaps (CDS). New approaches can now be used to demonstrate that a bank's CDS spreads depend not only on its own fundamentals but also on those of “neighbouring” banks, which means that CDS spreads also contain a systemic component.
Macroprudential policy is largely a new policy sphere, which is being established in a new institutional setting. We will therefore need to use new and innovative methods to deal with the issues that arise. And we should not tie ourselves down to particular types of analytical approaches. For example, methodologies of experimental economic research have barely featured in our financial stability analysis so far. I see highly relevant fields of application for these methods, not least for enabling us to better understand the impact of new instruments and new institutions.
Much the same applies to making greater use of “big data” mining as an input into our analysis of financial system stability. For instance, information on price developments or sentiment among participants in certain markets, such as stock market or real estate markets, can be collected by trawling the internet. I believe that mixing and matching this information with conventional sources of official statistics promises to be very fruitful. 
Over the past few decades, the teaching of economics has moved away from institutional approaches towards model-based and mathematical approaches. I am convinced that this was the right road to follow as it put our profession on a sound scientific footing.
However, institutional knowledge faded into the background in the process. The major challenge for the future is how to better combine these two elements. We need a better approach to teaching institutional frameworks without compromising analytical precision. Modern research in the area of economic history offers some very interesting ideas on how such interlinkages can be achieved.
Both sides have to meet halfway. The elegant yet unrealistic analytical model will not solve our problems. Likewise, references to complex institutions which shy away from academic analysis do not help to address the challenges of our time either.
Unless we establish a connection between academic methods and institutional knowledge, we will not be able to identify causality effects. All too often, the political discourse focuses on the success or failure of a given measure without any genuine impact study having been conducted. Of course, accurate impact studies will not be possible in many cases. After all, unlike many natural sciences, we have no laboratory in which to conduct our experiments. But there are still many ways in which we can come closer to identifying causal effects. We pursue these far too seldom.
In order to check, for example, whether a certain (macroprudential) measure fulfils its objective, we need microeconomic information from various financial institutions. There also have to be appropriate empirical methods with which the cause and effect of a measure can be gauged as precisely as possible.
We have made considerable progress in both areas. The Bundesbank has extensive data sets which we use for our own analyses and which we also allow external researchers to use. And the empirical, econometric methods, too, are much more refined today. Here, the Bundesbank can tap into its longstanding tradition of making new academic methods usable for policy analysis.
Ladies and gentlemen
Without strong scientific research and teaching, we will be unable to answer key political and economic questions. Academic research and teaching are the bedrock on which the necessary analysis can be built. And good policymaking requires good analysis.
I am very confident that an intensified dialogue between the fields of research and policy can succeed. The fact that we now have a significantly improved infrastructure for making sound evaluations of policy measures will undoubtedly contribute to this. Both data availability and empirical methods have improved dramatically, and corresponding analyses can be coordinated by international bodies.
However, there is still significant scope to intensify the dialogue between policymaking and research. This will require a change in mindset on both sides. I, for my part, will do everything I can to ensure that this change in mentality takes place and that we create a better framework for scientific analysis as an aid to policymaking.

