Following up on Vitor's explanation on the stress test, let me now highlight some key findings from the asset quality review. As you see on this slide, the AQR resulted in gross adjustment of €48 billion. You may be aware that this AQR was a process that stretched over almost 10 months. Its execution consisted of 10 specific work blocks that examined a variety of aspects, each of them very relevant in its own right and necessary to generate robust overall results.
I will not try to cover the whole of this massive process on each single work block in my comments here. That will be simply impossible. Instead I would like to focus on some high-level findings that represent key results of the exercise at an aggregated level.
The chart on this slide shows how different components of the AQR contribute to the overall adjustment. This AQR reviews banks' exposures in two ways, on an individual credit file basis and for smaller more homogeneous exposures on a collective basis. The first of these approaches was reflected in the credit file review where a total of around 119,000 of the riskiest debtors in the riskiest portfolios were analysed individually. The ultimate purpose was to verify that an appropriate provision level had been set against each debtor. You can see in the chart that this part of the AQR led to a €15.4 billion increase in provisions. This change in provisioning levels was then projected to the un-sampled debtors in the portfolio, for whom no credit file review was conducted, and the projection led to an additional €10.3 billion adjustment to provisions.
In contrast to the file by file approach, reflected in the credit file review, smaller more homogenous exposures are typically provisioned using a collective provisioning approach. In this collective provisioning work block we thus reviewed the outcomes of bank's own statistical models on where they were not deemed conservative enough according to our methodology, an adjustment to provisions was calculated in total. This led to an adjustment of €16.2 billion.
Finally we also reviewed exposures held at fair value, which were not covered in the work blocks mentioned previously, and this led to another adjustment of €4.6 billion. Overall, we thus arrive at a total adjustment to asset carrying values across all banks of roughly €48 billion. Since such adjustments have negative effects on banks' profits, of course, the lower the amount of tax to be paid. So taking these tax effects into account, €14 billion, we arrive at a net impact from the AQR of €34 billion.
Let me now say a few more words about an important component of the credit file review, namely the assessment of loan performance. At the start of the exercise it was known that participating banks' definition of which exposures are performing varied significantly per bank and per country. As part of the AQR the ECB does impose a standard definition of non-performing exposures across all banks using an approach agreed with the EBA. Let me emphasise that this represents a major step forward in terms of comparability across banks and countries.
The harmonisation of the non-performing exposure definition was crucial to ensure a consistent treatment of debtors being reviewed and allowed to set a level baseline, against which debtors could be assessed. As a result of this harmonisation, and because banks internal definitions were generally less conservative than the definition used by the AQR, €55 billion of additional non-performing exposures were identified at the outset of the credit file review. The credit file review itself on the subsequent projections of finding led to the identification of a significant additional stock of non-performing exposures, amounting to €81 billion. Together, the harmonisation of the definition on the credit file review itself thus led to a total adjustment in non-performing exposures of €136 billion. And this represents an 18% adjustment to the initial non-performing exposure stock reported by the participating banks.
Now provisioning adjustment. As you see on this slide they were totalling €43 billion across all asset segments. The assessment of provisioning levels was indeed the next step in reviewing a bank's classification of exposures into performing and non-performing. As mentioned, this assessment resulted in a total provisioning increase across all segments of €43 billion which is a 12% increase.
Looking at the main asset segments for which those adjustments were made we find that they were primarily driven by exposures in the large SMEs, large corporates and real estate related segments. Those exposures saw additional provisions of €12 billion, €9.5 billion and another €9.5 billion respectively. I should also add that the collateral valuation work block which we conducted was also an important input in calculating these adjustments. Across the SSM, collateral values were adjusted downwards by €39 billion representing an approximately 10% decrease compared to previous banks' internal valuation. The three categories of exposures I just mentioned were indeed particularly impacted by the collateral valuation. I can also add that shipping assets saw the largest relative increase in provisions amounting to 28% of the previous stock, and this reflects an increase of €2.6 billion.
I think the aspects I show on those last slides are important to understand what the actuary did and where the adjustment to asset values that constitutes its ultimate result comes from. As pointed out at the beginning this was a very rough summary of a very complex and huge process. And there are many additional aspects and findings that I would like to mention, including quite a few which are not purely quantitative but relate to banks processes and policies. But in the interests of time, let me now get back to a brief look at the overall capital shortfall identified in the comprehensive assessment before I conclude with some outlook of the main steps following today's publication of the outcome of the comprehensive assessment.
This is an overview. I am sure you cannot read the slide because it's too small. This is an overview of the 25 banks for which shortfalls have been detected. You can find it in the executive summary of our aggregate report. As you can see 12 of them have already raised enough capital in 2014 to cover their shortfalls completely, and this leaves us with a net amount of slightly over €9 billion that still needs to be covered.
This being said the immediate next steps for banks and supervisors are focused on capital planning. Those banks for which we identified a capital shortfall will have to submit capital plans by 10 November, in which they show in detail how they plan to cover those shortfalls. The Joint Supervisory teams in charge of the daily supervision of those banks, starting as of 4 November, will check those capital plans thoroughly, assessing their adequacy and credibility. As we communicated already in April this year banks with shortfalls identified in the AQR or in the baseline scenario of the stress test will have six months to implement these plans and cover the shortfalls starting from today. Where shortfalls arose from the adverse scenario, banks have nine months to do that.
While these actions and capital plans are only relevant for banks with shortfalls there will also be a wider range of follow-up actions concerning all participating banks, the banks which have a shortfall and the banks without shortfalls. These will include adjustments to accounts where breaches of accounting rules were found or where accounting provisions were not enough, but also pillar 2 measures for the prudential elements. As I mentioned earlier the actual findings were also not limited to quantitative aspects but included a number of issues concerning processes and policies, and that will be used as well in the supervision going forward.
With this short outlook on what is next for banks and supervision I would like to close. I think that we have achieved a lot in this comprehensive assessment but at the same time it is just the starting point for our new task under the SSM. We will take those on with the clear objective of conducting tough, fair and independent supervision on a day to day basis. And I am very much looking forward to the formal start of our new responsibilities on 4 November.

