Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak at the Bundesbank-BCBS joint workshop. It is a pleasure to be here.
When I consider the workshop's topic, accounting and financial regulation, two aspects immediately spring to mind: first, the need for harmonisation and second, the need for transparency. I will elaborate on these thoughts in the course of my speech.
In the years prior to the financial crisis, banks became increasingly active in the international arena. They expanded their foreign credit business and broadened their networks of subsidiaries and branches abroad. But banking supervision failed to keep pace with these developments and remained confined within national bounds. It was the financial crisis that finally underscored the need for harmonisation in banking supervision and for greater consistency in the regulatory requirements.
We have done a lot of work in Europe to meet these requirements - first and foremost by introducing the Single Rulebook. This package, which amongst others implements the Basel III framework, assures the harmonised implementation of the rules throughout all member states.
But when I speak of harmonised regulation, I also think of the foundations upon which banking regulation is built - and that brings us to the topic of our joint workshop. Supervisors need coherent information if they are to supervise banks in an adequate fashion. This is where transparency comes into play, a goal to which accounting and disclosure contribute.
In an international context, accounting standards still vary considerably. A very prominent case in point is the different treatment of derivatives under US GAAP and IFRS, and their impact on balance sheets. Different netting rules tend to suggest that European banks' derivatives holdings are much larger than those of their US counterparts. Another example is the leverage ratio: different accounting standards make it difficult to compare leverage ratios across jurisdictions. Hence the need for complex “number crunching” to make leverage ratios internationally comparable. This is hard going for supervisors and the markets alike and inhibits a regulatory level playing field.
The different accounting regimes used in the individual countries matter for at least two reasons. First, they directly affect the transparency and comparability of bank balance sheets across national borders, and second, they can potentially also influence bank business strategies in much the same way as regulatory requirements.
One of the more widely debated consequences of accounting rules is their potentially procyclical effect on banking business, a topic which was addressed at this workshop. Depending on the accounting requirements for setting aside loan loss provisions, banks may either act with foresight when they anticipate loan losses, or they may be required to wait for evidence to materialise. As a June 2014 study by Berenberg Bank concluded: “With forbearance [on troubled loans] remaining elevated and hidden loan losses a known unknown, we have little faith in the credibility of banks' stated book values.”
Another topic addressed today likewise hinges on the accounting framework: the ability to forecast credit losses or rating changes based on the information reported by firms. These examples illustrate how accounting rules can simultaneously impact on a number of distinct areas: financial institutions' corporate policy, the effect and design of banking regulation, the availability of credit to the real economy and, last but not least, the monetary transmission mechanism.
As I have shown, harmonised and transparent prudential legislation, underpinned by consistent accounting rules, is crucial for the effective supervision of credit institutions. It is here that Europe is about to usher in a new era. In about two weeks, on 4 November, the European Central Bank will assume responsibility for directly supervising the largest 120 banks in the euro area. These banks account for about 85 percent of banking assets throughout the euro area.
In the run-up to assuming supervisory responsibility, the ECBperformed a comprehensive assessment - an asset quality review and a stress test - in collaboration with the national competent authorities. The aim of this exercise is to shed greater light on banks' balance sheets and on the consistency of supervisory practices across Europe so as to ensure that the Single Supervisory Mechanism gets off to a credible start on 4 November. The asset quality review saw banks' balance sheets being analysed for the first time according to a harmonised set of pan-European standards. This ensured a level playing field across national jurisdictions.
I am certainly not overstating the case when I describe Europe-level supervision as the most important initiative aimed at financial market integration in Europe since the launch of monetary union. To put it in the words of the IMF, the European banking union is the “logical conclusion of the idea that integrated banking systems require integrated prudential oversight”.
In my introductory remarks, I mentioned two watchwords for banking regulation and supervision: harmonisation and transparency. On the topic of harmonisation, the Single Supervisory Mechanism will ensure that banks throughout the euro area are supervised according to a consistent set of standards. This will also enhance the effectiveness of banking supervision, because a joint supervisory approach can tackle cross-border effects more effectively than national supervisors.
As for transparency, the SSM will operate on the basis of more comprehensive information and benefit from cross-border comparisons and Europe-wide expertise. Pooling insights into different national and regional economic conditions, legal structures, and especially different banks' business and risk profiles, will facilitate a deeper understanding of the European banking sector. Furthermore, banking oversight at the European level will reduce the probability of national supervisors affording preferential treatment to “their” banks, thus contributing to prudential transparency.
So far, I have confined my remarks to the forthcoming European supervisory regime. But the Single Supervisory Mechanism is only the first pillar of the European banking union. In 2016, it will be augmented by the Single Resolution Mechanism. In my view, this mechanism is a vital step towards resolving the “too big to fail” problem. It will allow for an orderly resolution of distressed credit institutions without causing market turmoil. The SRM has the potential to curb supervisory forbearance, foster financial stability and, last but not least, reduce the likelihood of a government bail-out. This is crucially important for severing the nexus between banks' balance sheets and public finances.
Ladies and gentlemen, the German Minister of Finance, Wolfgang Schäuble, wrote in the Financial Times this summer that, in an ideal world, Europe would be a political union. If that were so, he wrote, Europe would be best placed to meet the challenges it faced in the 21st century in a way that served its own interests.
This is especially true when we look at Europe as banking supervisors. As we have seen, European banks are highly interconnected, and national banking crises tend to spill over national borders. Only with common European mechanisms and institutions can we effectively tackle these developments.
But is harmonisation an end in itself? Most certainly not. Harmonisation will always be constrained by the political and legal backdrop in the relevant jurisdiction. And in Europe, we must concede that the ideal world of a political union is still some way off, which means that complete harmonisation remains out of reach. Ever since the EU came into being, European integration has proceeded step by step, with the next step forward always being dictated by what was feasible at the given time. These are the circumstances which all harmonisation projects in Europe need to come to terms with.
In the banking supervision sphere we have only an incomplete and imperfect set of instruments and institutions at our disposal. One prominent imperfection I can think of is the lack of control and intervention rights at the European level, which is hindering further integration and harmonisation. As a case in point, the European deposit guarantee scheme cannot be established upon the existing legal basis. It would require common accountability and European control rights - things which are not permitted under European law as it stands. This is why we have shelved the common deposit guarantee scheme for now and are instead concentrating on harmonising national funds. I think it is wise for us to take our time here.
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to close my speech this evening with the words “United in diversity” which, since 2000, have been the European Union's official motto. We have to work together to bring about greater harmonisation in different spheres while at the same time leaving scope for national differences.
And I think this applies in equal measure to harmonisation efforts in the field of banking regulation and supervision. We need harmonised rules to facilitate effective and comparable supervision. But at the same time, we need to know the framework conditions we need to navigate: be they the political and legal factors which constrain harmonisation, or be they the upside potential offered by diversity across national banking systems which can foster innovation and provide fresh perspectives.

