I am delighted to have the pleasure of concluding this first Bundesbank symposium on financial stability and the role of central banks.
In ancient Greece, the word "symposium" described a social gathering with food and drink. I hope you all enjoyed our symposium in the truest sense of the word at our official dinner yesterday evening.
Overall, our symposium was geared more heavily towards the modern meaning of the word "symposium", which refers to conferences as a forum for exchanging information. Over the course of two days, this symposium provided a platform for debate between senior policymakers, central bankers, supervisors, academics and financial sector professionals.
I am very pleased that so many distinguished guests accepted our invitation to participate in this event. The diverse background and the extensive experience of the keynote speakers, panellists and participants allowed us to cover a lot of territory. Thanks to your outstanding participation and lively discussions we were all able to benefit from an intensive exchange of thoughts and ideas.
George Bernard Shaw is said to have made a notable remark on the benefits of exchanging ideas. He said: "If you have an apple and I have an apple and we exchange these apples then you and I will still each have one apple. But if you have an idea and I have an idea and we exchange these ideas, then each of us will have two ideas."
I think those words perfectly capture the intention and the outcome of our two-day symposium. Ideas multiply when you share them and they become better when you discuss them.
In this spirit, the symposium addressed the overarching question of how to maintain financial stability - a topic that has acquired the centre stage in the public policy debate since the outbreak of the global crisis.
The crisis has taught us a number of lessons. One of the most important lessons in my view is that monetary policy and financial stability cannot be viewed as independent concerns.
Monetary policy cannot function properly in an environment of financial instability. Financial stability is a necessary prerequisite for an effective monetary policy because crises threaten the transmission mechanism of monetary policy.
Conversely, price stability is a necessary precondition for maintaining financial stability. But this alone is not sufficient. Safeguarding financial stability is a multi-dimensional problem because systemic risks may arise from a variety of sources and can be transmitted through various channels. Asset price bubbles and excessive risk-taking by systemic players serve as just two examples.
Another key lesson to be learned from the crisis is that regulators need to consider the financial system as a whole. From a financial stability viewpoint, it is not enough to focus on the soundness of individual institutions. While it is true that enhancing the resilience of individual institutions does make them less likely to fail, the possibility of allowing an institution to become insolvent cannot - and in a market economy must not - be ruled out completely. If a large or interconnected institution fails, it might drag down other institutions with it and trigger a systemic crisis. To mitigate systemic risks, we need to complement microprudential regulation and supervision by adding a systemic, that is, a macroprudential view.
Adopting a systemic view also means extending the regulatory framework beyond banks. Stricter regulatory requirements in one sector might lead to business being shifted into other sectors. To avoid such regulatory arbitrage, regulation needs to encompass all the markets, products and participants involved in the financial system.
Finally, let me say that regulation will always only be as good as its implementation. I would like to give you an example. While we are preparing for a single banking supervision in Europe, there still is no final agreement on a resolution mechanism. But how can a European supervisory body be credible if it cannot resolve a bank when necessary? Thus, I appeal to those involved in the negotiations to reach an agreement on the European Single Resolution Mechanism prior to the European elections in May.
What I consider crucial in a more general context is the timely and consistent transposition of international recommendations on regulation into national law. With diverging or inconsistent national approaches we would risk counteracting the internationally agreed reforms or possibly eventually even render them ineffective.
Ladies and gentlemen
Let me conclude. The leading question of our symposium was how to maintain financial stability. The answer to such a complex question is of course not a simple one. Over the last two days we have exchanged many thoughts and ideas on financial stability, its interplay with monetary policy and the appropriate role for central banks. So I do hope that George Bernard Shaw was right and that everybody leaves this symposium with new ideas on how to reach our common goal of safeguarding financial stability.
Let me say what a great pleasure it has been for me to be here with you. I have very much enjoyed listening to your presentations and discussing your ideas. And for that, I would like to thank you all. I wish to particularly extend my gratitude to the panellists, panel chairs and keynote speakers whose efforts helped to make this symposium a success. And, last but not least, I would like to thank all my colleagues at the Bundesbank who made this symposium possible in the first place.

