Thank you very much for inviting me to the Investmentgipfel (investment summit) of the WirtschaftsWoche business weekly. I am delighted to be here and to have the opportunity to talk to you and to discuss regulation with you.
In a move that bucked the current trend, ten years ago to the day - on 24 November 2005 - a major step towards deregulation was taken in England and Wales. It was the day on which the "Licensing Act" came into effect. This act abolished the restrictions on pubs' opening hours.  I'm sure that many raised their glasses to celebrate this deregulatory move.
Regulation, deregulation and reregulation are the topic of debate time and again in the banking community as well . In my remarks, I will revisit this debate and investigate whether regulation of the banking sector has gone "beyond the pale" - or has possibly not gone far enough.
Seven years ago, the global economy was struck by the biggest financial and economic crisis since the Great Depression of the 1930s. At the very beginning of the crisis, the G20 leaders agreed to launch a global regulatory reform. Everyone could clearly see that things had gone amiss in the preceding years and that corrections were needed.
But let's return to the here and now. Just over a week ago, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision informed G20 leaders that they would not be able to complete the reform of the Basel framework - Basel III - until 2016. I know what some of you are thinking: Wasn't Basel III already adopted in 2010? Of course it was, but back then everyone had agreed that the framework still needed some fundamental improvements which could only be developed over the long haul.
Translated, this means that a number of key improvements to the Basel framework will only be completed next year. However, we will then have a consistent, sound and global regulatory framework for banks. The G20 ratified this time schedule last week.
Even before then, I had been hearing calls time and again to finally get the reform of banking and financial market regulation over and done with. And not just that: I often even hear calls to undo some elements of the reforms, even if these demands naturally come wrapped in "politically correct" packaging.
On the other hand, there are voices calling for reforms to go much further still. Some of them belong to experts whose views should be taken seriously, such as Paul Volcker, Martin Hellwig, and Nobel Prize winners Joseph Stiglitz and Eugene Fama.
There is a "third way" in the middle. Its proponents are convinced that the reforms that are currently under way will close the regulatory gaps and therefore need to be completed. Then the impact of the new rules should be examined before considering new regulatory projects.
I fully agree that we cannot afford to put off completion of the reforms "until the cows come home". I am also firmly convinced that we have do a decent job of wrapping up the current round of reforms. This is the only way we can create a thoroughly stable regulatory framework which will reduce the likelihood of future crises. And this will take some more time.
Before I touch upon the outstanding reforms, let me say one thing: financial crises are expensive. Just take the global financial crisis of 2008. The costs of this crisis were staggering. As a case in point, the developed G20 countries' government debt soared from around 70 percent to around 110 percent between 2007 and 2014. Average unemployment in this group of countries also picked up by more than two percentage points. The financial sector's excesses inflicted lasting damage on potential economic growth.
And it is a truism that financial crises are staggeringly expensive and that the costs are usually socialised. Looking back throughout history, three years after a banking crisis, central government debt is up by an average of 86 percent from pre-crisis levels. 
There is therefore no point in arguing the necessity of reducing the likelihood of crisis. That is a given. Which made revising and improving the regulatory framework the absolutely right response to the crisis. This has made Basel III and the other reform elements into the foundation of a more stable financial system.
Looking from today's vantage point, the reforms were successful and have indeed helped make the banking sector more stable. Between 2008 and 2014 the euro area's banks reduced their total assets by 20 percent and increased their capital ratios by five percentage points to some 14 percent. 
Even cost-benefit analyses show that tighter regulation delivers major benefits to society. 
And yet there are still those who complain that regulatory reform has gone too far. One of their main arguments is that higher capital requirements constrain banks' lending and thus constrict growth. They are asserting, therefore, that regulation takes a financial toll on the economy.
Empirical studies suggest, however, that tighter capital requirements are beneficial, and not just for stability reasons. They are also correlated with higher lending volumes - in effect, they boost lending.
At the same time, one could also argue that they improve the quality of loans as well. The reason is quite simple: the better a bank is capitalised, the more its owners stand to lose if loans default and cause losses. This means the more capital a bank has, the greater its incentive to look more closely at loans.
Ultimately, this pushes to the fore the most important function which a bank provides an economy: quality assurance for investment decisions. It is the job of the banks to identify the best possible investments and to channel scarce economic resources to precisely those investments. High capital requirements aid banks in discharging this function.
In a nutshell: The costs of good regulation, in terms of lending, are not nearly as high as some would have you believe. In addition, we must not look at the costs of regulation in isolation. They have to be compared with the cost of crises. And the costs of regulation come off as looking very reasonable - especially from the taxpayer's point of view.
Our goal should therefore be a sound and consistent regulatory framework in order to reduce the probability of future crises.
After seven years of regulatory reform, however, there is the danger that enthusiasm to finish the job will flag. Memories of the financial crisis will fade into the background, superseded by more pressing problems. We cannot afford to succumb to reform fatigue as we approach the final stretch.
That is because we have to take a long-term view when talking about bank regulation and the reform thereof. We need to remind ourselves of the objective of regulatory reform and the mandate of banking regulators: to protect stability, which is a public good. This is to ensure that the financial system always performs its economic function: of fostering growth-enhancing investment.
If we therefore speak of the impact and the design of regulatory reform, we should not fall into short-termism and not just talk about the profitability of the banking sector. Please don't get me wrong: profitability matters, too, for banks have to be able to make a profit over the long term. However, our focus, as regulators, is on stability - with a view to sustainable real economic growth.
Let us not forget  the repeated instances in the past in which credit bubbles have led to financial crises - and, each and every time, it was said that "this time is different" and that it is not a bubble this time. But every bubble ends up bursting, and the costs have to be socialised.
There is a simple but important truth in this: as unpleasant as it may sound, the reforms have to be completed. That is the only way we can reduce the likelihood of future crises and keep taxpayers from having to carry the can.
Against this background, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision came up with the new Basel III regulatory framework: tougher capital requirements, a leverage ratio, new liquidity regulations and new macroprudential instruments. These rules were implemented in Europe as the CRD IV package and have been in force since 2014.
The reforms have thus heralded the inception of a multipolar regulatory system. Multipolar here refers to the large number of regulatory requirements banks now have to meet. They have to simultaneously comply with multiple minimum requirements instead of just one single risk-weighted capital ratio.
This approach, consisting of various regulatory measures, has often come in for criticism, yet I think it makes sense. Banks have different business models and risk profiles, and each regulatory measure mitigates banks' risks from a different angle.
Let me explain briefly how the instruments we still need to finalise will address the various weak points in the banking industry. I shall start with the leverage ratio, which measures how highly a bank is leveraged.
There is also a risk-weighted minimum capital ratio. The procedures used here to calculate credit risk, market risk and operational risks, and the attendant capital requirements, are currently under revision. The market risk rules will be completed this winter, whereas proposals for the other types of risk, such as concerning the standardised approach for credit risk, are at the consultation stage. The Internal Ratings-Based (IRB) approach for calculating credit risk is likewise being substantially reworked.
Moreover, the Basel Committee is also discussing the current practice of giving sovereign bonds privileged regulatory treatment. The Bundesbank is campaigning to require banks to hold sufficient capital against the risks of sovereign bonds and for exposures to sovereigns to be covered by the usual large exposure rules.
Ladies and gentlemen, since the 2008 global financial crisis, regulation has been significantly tightened all over the world. At the same time, we have established a Single Supervisory Mechanism for banks in the euro area.
Neither of these developments, of course, has failed to leave a mark on the banks. Tighter regulation and the SSM will make the banks more stable - this is the intended effect. However, regulation and supervision also create costs for banks - and one hears complaints from some quarters that these costs are excessive.
Are the costs of regulation excessive? In my remarks, I addressed the key question of whether the reforms to banking regulation since the crisis have gone too far - or perhaps not far enough.
I have presented two important findings. First: If we analyse the costs and benefits to society, the outcome is clear: compared to the costs of crisis, the costs of regulation are an appropriate price to pay for more stability. Second: Good regulation not only fosters financial stability but also promotes sustainable economic growth.
On the whole, I believe we have been neither overregulating nor underregulating. What is decisive now is for us to finish the job. And this will take some time.
Albert Einstein is purported to have said, "Make things as simple as possible, but not simpler." I have nothing to add to that.

