Thank you, Ambassador Witter, for hosting this event here at the German Embassy in Singapore. I am happy to see so many distinguished guests here today to bid farewell to the Bundesbank's departing representative, Mr Patrick Hoffmann, and to welcome his successor, Mr Min-Kyu Jang.
I am particularly happy that Ms Loh from the Monetary Authority of Singapore is here today. Thank you, Ms Loh, for your remarks.
And I am happy to announce that this year we celebrate a special anniversary. It was exactly ten years ago that the first Bundesbank representative, Mr Kai Tänzler, arrived in Singapore. As our objective is to cover the world's most important financial centres, it was only natural that we should send a representative to Singapore. According to the Global Financial Centres Index, Singapore is among the four top financial centres worldwide, just behind New York, London and Hong Kong.
By sending representatives abroad we also acknowledge that the world in which we live has become very small over recent decades. And in a small world, every policymaker in every country must be aware that his or her decisions influence other countries as well. The world is interconnected through a close-knit network of trade relations and via a globalised financial system. Financial markets in particular have become integrated to such a degree that a small distortion at one end of the world can quickly spread and affect the entire system.
The Asian crisis of 1997 is a case in point, as is the crisis in the UShousing market of 2007 that evolved into the global financial crisis of 2008. Likewise, the current situation in the euro area draws the attention of market participants and policymakers all over the world.
Nevertheless, in the latter case we have to make a distinction. At the centre of attention is not the euro area as a whole but Greece as part of the euro area. And in Greece, the situation has certainly not improved over the last few weeks. Rather, it is obvious that the financing problems are increasing further. How much longer exactly the country's financial resources will last is hard to gauge, but it seems fair to say that time is running out.
Right now, only the Greek government knows the precise state of their finances. And right now, only the Greek government can undertake the necessary reforms. Further financial aid would certainly buy time, as it has done before. However, it cannot remedy Greece's lack of competitiveness or establish a functioning administrative structure.
What is the connection between Greece and the euro area? Well, it is clear that the euro area is far more robust today than it was five years ago, when the problems in Greece first emerged. What is more, the markets have also come to understand that the problems facing Greece are unique and of the country's own making. In my view, the contagion effects would therefore be manageable.
Nevertheless, the case of Greece shows how closely interconnected the world has become. Mutual exchange and cooperation have therefore become essential tools of policymaking in the 21st century. Today, there are many international bodies in which countries from around the world work together to make the financial system and the world economy more stable and more prosperous.
In any case, international cooperation always starts at the personal level. This is where our representatives here in Singapore come into play. Their task is to build networks, to share information and ideas, to explain the Bundesbank's positions and to facilitate cooperation.
For the past three years, Mr Hofmann has filled this position in Singapore. And judging from the distinguished crowd gathered today, he has done an excellent job. I would like to thank him personally and in the name of the Bundesbank for his service.
I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome his successor, Mr Min-Kyu Jang. Mr Jang has been Senior Market Analyst in our Market Analysis and Portfolios Division in Frankfurt. And yet he also has extensive international experience, which he gathered while working in our trading offices in New York and Tokyo. At the personal level, he also has close ties to Asia, as his parents came to Germany from South Korea, and he still has relatives over there. I am certain that he will be a worthy successor to Mr Hoffmann.
I am also certain that our presence here in Singapore will deepen friendship and cooperation, not only between Mr Jang and his peers but also between the Deutsche Bundesbank and the Monetary Authority of Singapore.

