After the stress test is before the stress test; that's what I promised you almost one year ago at the Comprehensive Assessment press conference. The markets are always looking ahead to the future, and this is what banks should be doing, too - as should supervisors, of course.
One issue that is currently attracting a great deal of attention is the persistently low interest rates. It's an area in which we have teamed up with the German credit institutions to look to the future and analyse how the low interest rates will impact on the banks going forward.
Our focus is on commercial banks, savings banks and credit cooperatives. These institutions are an important source of funding for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs): the backbone of the German economy. And these institutions run a business model that is comparatively reliant on interest income. A persistent phase of very low interest rates therefore places an especially heavy strain on them.
We already began exploring the profitability of these rather small and medium-sized banks in the low-interest-rate setting back in the second half of 2013, when we launched an extensive survey. Even then, it became clear that the low interest rates would take quite a toll on the banks' balance sheets. And even then, we drew attention to structural problems in discussions with the institutions and in our public statements. Interest rates have continued their descent since then, and the yield curve has flattened further.
In the current survey, we look at what the next five years will bring for the small and medium-sized banks that we supervise. The results tie in with the signs that were already emerging two years ago: the earnings outlook is becoming increasingly gloomy.
But there are also two pieces of good news. First, the banks are not simply putting their head in the sand and hoping it will all blow over; they are aware of the risks and can therefore prepare for them. Second, the vast majority of the credit institutions surveyed are well placed to cope with the challenges that lie ahead.
Let's take a brief look at the results of the survey.
First things first: which institutions did we examine? In the medium to long term, the persistently low interest rates pose a serious threat mainly to credit institutions whose business models are highly geared towards interest income. This includes the bulk of the credit institutions directly supervised by the Federal Financial Supervisory Authority (BaFin) and the Bundesbank.
Around 1,500 of these small and medium-sized banks took part in our survey, which focused on quantitative and qualitative analyses of profitability and risk-taking as well as stress tests for credit and market risk. The time horizon of the analyses covered the years 2015 to 2019. The participating banks represent total assets of just under two trillion euro, which equates to roughly one-quarter of the German banking market.
In a first step, we asked the credit institutions to provide their target and forecast data. Remember that each individual bank bases its targets and forecasts on different underlying assumptions - so the results are not necessarily comparable across banks. That is why we additionally defined four uniform interest rate scenarios - the hypothetical impacts of which can then be compared among the institutions. Scenario A is the low-interest-rate setting scenario. In this scenario, we collected forecasts for the banks' profit and loss accounts. It is based on a constant yield curve and the balance sheet as at 31 December 2014. Scenario B is the positive interest shock scenario, in which the assumption of an unchanged balance sheet is retained. However, it is assumed that interest rates rise by 200 basis points across all maturities - in other words, there is a parallel upward shift in the yield curve. Scenario C is the negative interest shock scenario: as in scenario B, the institutions are not allowed to respond by adjusting their balance sheets, but here, interest rates fall by 100 basis points. Finally, scenario D assumes that interest rates fall uniformly by 100 basis points, while the institutions can respond by making appropriate balance sheet adjustments.
We used the interest rate scenarios to analyse the earnings position forecast by the banks. To test their resilience, we stress-tested their capital adequacy on two counts: credit risk and market risk.
The credit risk stress test comprises two scenarios, each of which involves a rise in the probability of default on loans as well as a haircut on collateral values. In addition, the market risk stress test simulates a credit spread mark-up for liquidity reserve and trading book assets.
First, the key takeaways of the survey: according to the banks' own projections, profitability is expected to decline by around 25 percent by 2019. That's just over two billion euro on average each year, compared with pre-tax profits of a little more than ten billion euro realised by the participating banks in 2014. Should the low-interest-rate phase persist (scenario A), net earnings would even slump by 50 percent given unchanged total assets. If the interest rate level were to fall by a further 100 basis points (scenario D), a decline of around 60 percent is even expected, as long as banks can respond by making balance sheet adjustments. In the event of an interest rate rise (scenario B), the banks report that their net earnings would stabilise at slightly less than the 2014 level.
So a clear need for action is already apparent at this juncture, as a certain amount of time will be required to implement structural reforms and adjust business models.
What exactly are the structural problems that banks face? As previously mentioned, the vast majority of German banks run a business model which relies heavily on interest income. The credit institutions fund their operations via deposits which cost less in interest than market financing. This money is invested in the form of loans which yield higher interest rates than investments in the market.
Another source of revenue for banks is maturity transformation - that is, they use short-term deposits for funding and grant long-term loans. However, maturity transformation only generates income against the backdrop of a rising and not-too-flat yield curve, ie when long-term interest rates are higher than short-term ones.
Two factors depress net interest income in a low-interest-rate environment. First, interest rates on deposits move closer to the rates paid for market financing. Second, in lending business, higher-yielding existing business needs to be replaced by lower-yielding new business.
It is particularly the first factor which pushes down net interest income. Despite fierce competition, most banks are convinced that they can achieve minor increases in lending margins. However, this does not make up for the considerable decline in deposit margins. Moreover, the narrow spreads between short-term and long-term interest rates reduce the contribution to income from maturity transformation. All in all, profitability diminishes for good.
The impacts of the low-interest-rate environment are of a structural nature and will leave their mark on banks' balance sheets for years to come. A low-interest ten-year housing loan will still produce low interest returns in ten years' time. This low profitability over a long period of time can potentially pose a risk to banks' resilience. So much for the rather unpleasant earnings outlook for banks at the current juncture.
So what can banks do? The easiest switch to flick, it would appear, would be to charge bank customers negative interest rates on their deposits. Yet in practice, nobody knows for sure if bank customers would still be willing to keep their deposits in bank accounts under such circumstances. Our survey reveals that only a minority of institutions would consider introducing negative interest rates in the event that the low-interest-rate environment persisted.
Instead, our survey suggests that the banks will carry on trying to expand their non-interest business operations. A prime example of this is fees commission business, ie fees for services, such as account management or deposit transaction fees. More than half of the surveyed banks reported that they had already increased their commissions in response to the low interest rates. Indeed, according to the banks' own projections, net commission income is the only income component that is growing, albeit marginally, in relation to total assets, which has a stabilising effect on revenue.
Most German credit institutions have used the past few years to stock up their equity capital and their capital buffers, so they've "fattened up for winter".
As a result, the resilience of the respondent German banks is very high. The CET1 capital ratio for medium-sized banks stood at around 14 percent at the end of 2014, and all institutions exceeded the regulatory minimum capital requirements. Even our less favourable interest rate scenarios and tough stress tests showed that the bulk of institutions meet the supervisory capital requirements.
One reason for this are the large reserves that banks hold. Many institutions are able to absorb the losses arising in the forecast period by liquidating reserves. They can also draw on excess liquidity, which can likewise be used to absorb losses.
But at the end of the day, there's no getting around the fact that sitting out the current situation would be irresponsible and exceedingly risky, because diminishing profitability can swiftly erode the buffers - especially in tandem with a potential downturn in the general economic climate.
A question that is often posed is whether banks assume greater risks in the low-interest-rate environment in their search for income. Our survey shows that banks do, indeed, take more risks in their liquidity reserves, ie securities which they hold for proprietary trading purposes.
This is reflected in portfolio shifts towards securities with lower ratings and longer maturities. For example, the weighted residual maturities of securities in the liquidity reserve - which accounted for around 20 percent of total assets in 2014 - were extended by just under one-third on balance. This, of course, increases interest rate risk in the liquidity reserve. We also observed structural portfolio shifts towards lower ratings, though still in the investment grade segment.
So although banks are, indeed, increasing their exposure to risk, their behaviour in this regard cannot be labelled irresponsible given their hidden reserves and capital.
Ladies and gentlemen, the good news is that even continued low interest rates do not pose an insuperable challenge for German banks.
However, the credit institutions will have to scrutinise their business models and work on their profitability. Which products are rewarding? Which opportunities does digitalisation offer? These are the questions that banks must ask themselves.
It is crucial in such a challenging market environment for banks to see structural change as a fixed item on the agenda, to actively contribute to digitalising banking business and to rethink the strategic and financial merits of their branch structure.
I am convinced that the vast majority of German banks will rise to this challenge.

