I would also like to extend you a warm welcome to the Bundesbank's Regional Office in Hesse on the occasion of the first Karl Otto Pöhl Lecture. Furthermore, I would like to join Paul Volcker in congratulating you, Mr von Rosen, on inaugurating this event on behalf of the Frankfurter Gesellschaft and I hope that there will be many more Karl Otto Pöhl Lectures to follow.
It was a privilege for the Bundesbank to assume the role as the host of this first Lecture, and I am especially pleased that you, Mrs Pöhl, accepted our invitation to today's event.
I think that the building here on the Taunusanlage is a rather good choice of location, especially as it was designed and constructed back in the 1980s when Karl Otto Pöhl himself was President of the Deutsche Bundesbank. And unlike the high-rise office building in Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse, he was very fond of the style of this post-modern building. At the time of its inauguration, in any case, he spoke of a "beautifully structured new building that is full of light" and an "architectural design that adds to the urban fabric".
Whenever he had guests who were impressed by the skyline view of Frankfurt from the 12th and 13th floors of the Bundesbank's main building, he liked to say that the best thing about the view is that you cannot see the Bundesbank.
This anecdote goes to show that Karl Otto Pöhl had a clear opinion about aesthetic issues as well - not to mention a sense of humour. In an attempt to save the honour of the Bundesbank's main building, I would, however, just like to add that virtually no other building so perfectly epitomises the Bundesbank's traditional stability-oriented stance than the clearly defined structures of its main building in Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse.
Ladies and gentlemen
Almost a year ago to the day, on 9 December 2014, Karl Otto Pöhl passed away. Just the day before yesterday he would have turned 86. It is therefore a good time to be holding this Lecture in his name.
Saying that, it is, nonetheless, pure coincidence that this event is taking place on the same day that the ECB Governing Council decided on further monetary policy easing measures. If you were hoping that I would be using this forum to talk to you about my stance on today's decision in great detail, I'm afraid I am going to have to disappoint you as I will only be briefly touching on this subject a little later on.
Instead, I would like to take this opportunity to talk to you primarily about the cornerstones of German and European monetary policy that Karl Otto Pöhl helped shape and which are still of relevance today. He did, after all, play an instrumental role in two currency unions: German and European monetary union.
Let's take a trip down memory lane back to that very day on 20 April 1988, which Ms Rutzka-Hasche has already mentioned. On this day, the building in which we find ourselves now was officially inaugurated as the "Land Central Bank in Hesse".
Land Central Banks were proud institutions, which attached great importance to independence and eyed with suspicion activities at the Bundesbank's Central Office in Frankfurt. Back then, the President of the Bundesbank was, of course, still invited to hold a speech at festive events, such as the one that evening.
At the beginning of his speech, Karl Otto Pöhl spoke about connections between Frankfurt, Goethe and the central bank. This stood to reason, as the artistic works in this building were, after all, inspired by Goethe's Faust; Faust II to be precise. In the main part of his speech, he went on to talk about Frankfurt as a financial centre and about topics that were of interest to the financial market players back then: the abolition of stock exchange turnover tax, the levying of a withholding tax, the introduction of money market funds and forward transactions.
Just before the end of his speech, Karl Otto Pöhl finally talked about the importance of price stability and the possibility of a European monetary union. To quote his words:
"The Federal Republic of Germany owes so much to a successful stability policy [...] that it would be foolish renounce it in favour of other objectives or to even consider tampering with it. This applies in equal measure to what is - without a doubt - an important political objective: the creation of a European currency. One which is issued and whose value is safeguarded by a European central bank."
He then went on to emphasise that: "Contrary to certain claims, the Bundesbank by no means belongs to those who are opposed to such a project. We merely believe that this European currency of the future, which will ultimately replace the Deutsche Mark, must not be inferior to or weaker than the Deutsche Mark itself."
In my opinion, this quote nicely expresses the fact that Karl Otto Pöhl was quite open to European integration, but was not a fervent advocate of a single currency. This was not because he feared that the Bundesbank would lose power as a result, but because he had reservations about the stability of the currency.
Just two months later, in June 1988, the European Council of Hanover entrusted a committee of experts, under the chairmanship of the President of the European Commission at the time, Jacques Delors, with the task of putting forward proposals for the progressive development of an Economic and Monetary Union. Alongside the other central bank governors of the ECcountries, Karl Otto Pöhl was also appointed to serve in this group of experts.
For Pöhl, this was certainly no easy task: he found himself caught up in a conflict of interest between his function as President of the Bundesbank, which, back then, largely dictated monetary policy in Europe, and the task conferred upon him by the Commission to formulate concrete proposals for the creation of a common European monetary authority, which would ultimately spell the end of the Deutsche Mark and the other national currencies. For one thing was for certain: the group of experts was not summoned to discuss whether there should be a currency union, but rather how this goal was to be achieved.
With regard to the Bundesbank, some will most certainly have seen it the same way as Otmar Issing recently put it as he spoke about "monetary and foreign exchange policy's fall from Mount Olympus".
The Delors Report, which was presented in April 1989, outlined an Economic and Monetary Union in its final state and the path to achieving this goal in three stages. The proposals for the creation of a currency union were, however, much more concrete than those for an economic union. The proposals that were made were essentially those that later became known as the Maastricht framework: monetary and foreign exchange policy was communitised, whereas fiscal and economic policy remained in the hands of the national governments.
And if we were discussing the Five Presidents' Report today, entitled “Completing Europe's Economic and Monetary Union”, then we wouldn't be talking about monetary union in the narrower sense, but about economic union, fiscal union, capital markets union and banking union.
Incidentally, the idea of a single system of European banking supervision was already discussed in the Delors Commission. Even then, several members voiced their support, including the subsequent ECB President Wim Duisenberg. Their proposals failed to find a majority, however.
Of course, we should bear in mind that banks were, at that time, conducting cross-border business on a much smaller scale than they are today. Since then, the euro in particular has driven forward the integration of the European financial markets to such an extent that supervision at the purely national level is no longer fitting in the euro area. By initiating the European banking union in 2012, policymakers took the logical step to resolve upon a framework for a single supervisory regime. The advocates of European banking supervision in the Delors Commission have thus proved themselves to be especially forward-looking.
The Delors Commission did, however, recognise that binding budgetary rules would be indispensable, and that is thanks not least to Karl Otto Pöhl.
Pöhl was also the first person to raise the idea of the famous 3 percent deficit rule - at least, according to the economic historian Harold James, who studied the Commission's minutes. However, the figure of 3 percent did not yet crop up in the Delors Report itself. Instead, there was abstract talk of a cap on budget deficits. The Delors Report also contained an early argument that monetary financing of the public sector would have to be ruled out so that stability-oriented monetary policy could be safeguarded.
The guiding theme of Pöhl's work in the Delors Commission was, in his own words, the basic idea of the need for an independent central bank committed to price stability and able to make decisions as the guarantor of a functioning monetary union. And in the end, he was also able to convince the other members of this. Thus, the Commission pledged to uphold independence and the primary objective of price stability.
In more recent times, a number of prominent commentators, such as Joseph Stiglitz, have called into question the independence of central banks. Others wish to elevate financial stability to place it on a par with price stability as an objective of monetary policy.
Yet in my opinion, both issues - the importance of independence and the primacy of price stability - are as topical as they ever were. The objective of keeping prices stable in the medium term should not be compromised by other objectives because, at the end of the day, that could also jeopardise central bank independence, which is vital for the very reason that it allows central banks to pursue price stability undeterred by discretionary political interference. And it is against this backdrop that I find the excessive convergence of monetary policy and fiscal policy a fundamentally worrying development.
Government bond purchases by central banks are particularly conducive to moving monetary and fiscal policy closer together because they make central banks the member states' biggest creditor. This is a problem in the euro area, in particular, with its asymmetrical integration of different policy areas.
High levels of debt and what appears to be mounting consolidation fatigue will not make it easy to close the current chapter on ultra-easy money further down the line, because there's a risk that some countries' finance ministers will get used to the idea that there isn't much of a downside to maintaining high levels of public debt.
Monetary policy should not be forced to pick up the pieces for other policy areas. In a recently published model analysis, two economists demonstrated that a central bank that seeks to not only safeguard price stability but also cushion the negative fallout of structural problems ultimately encourages other policymakers to make less of an effort themselves. That reduces macroeconomic welfare. After all, when it comes down to it, only general policymaking in the shape of growth-enhancing structural reforms and sustainable public finances can lay the groundwork for lasting growth.
I would like, if I may, to say a few words about today's decision by the ECB Governing Council. First things first: the Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections presented today give no cause for concern over the development of the euro-area economy. In fact, they confirm my view that the steep drop in energy prices is supporting the recovery of the euro area's economy. The lower energy prices also go a long way towards explaining the evolution of consumer price inflation.
While the depreciation of the euro in recent weeks was seen as a stimulating factor in the staff projections, it did not come solely as a result of the expected loosening of the Eurosystem's monetary policy stance. It is also an outcome of firmer expectations of a policy rate hike in the USA, for instance.
It's clear that inflation as forecast by the Eurosystem staff will fall short of our price stability target not only in 2016 but probably into 2017 as well. That's not something we should simply brush aside. But given the predominant role which the drop in energy prices plays in euro-area inflation and the extensive monetary policy measures that have already been taken - which can entail risks and side-effects of their own - I personally did not see any case for a further easing of monetary conditions.  
There have always been phases in which falling energy prices allow inflation to drop temporarily into negative territory. One such spell was in 1986-87, in the days of Karl Otto Pöhl, and monetary policymakers were wise to look through such short-lived shocks as long as there were no signs of second-round effects. And I see no such indications at present.
Ladies and gentlemen
The Delors Report only sketched out the broad lines of monetary union and remained very vague in many respects.
With Karl Otto Pöhl as chairman, the central bank governors then drafted the Statute of the European Central Bank, which was appended as a Protocol to the Maastricht Treaty. In an interview, Pöhl himself once called this his most important personal achievement.
While work was taking place on the ECB's statute, the process of German unification was also getting underway.
In the summer of this year, the Bundesbank celebrated the 25th anniversary of German monetary union. This recalled to mind, not least, the logistical challenge of introducing the Deutsche Mark in East Germany on 1 July 1990, several months before German reunification.
However, this rapid introduction of the Deutsche Mark was economically very controversial. Karl Otto Pöhl warned against rushing into a monetary union too quickly and initially called for a certain amount of economic convergence to take place so as not to endanger price stability. He knew that if a monetary union were created prematurely, East German enterprises would not be able to hold their own in direct competition with their West German counterparts, as productivity in East Germany was lower.
Looking back, he said that there was probably no alternative: "The political reality back then was more pressing than economic logic."
A particularly controversial issue was the setting of the exchange rate. Competing aims had to be balanced against each other here. There was a desire to keep inflation risks from the currency changeover as low as possible, to limit the strain on the public purse, to protect the competitive position of East German enterprises, and to ensure that the value of East Germans' savings did not depreciate excessively.
Even during his final interview, shortly before his 85th birthday, Karl Otto Pöhl stressed that the exchange rate at which East German marks were exchanged for Deutsche Marks certainly did not correspond to the economic realities at the time. However, he accepted this political decision and the Bundesbank naturally provided strong support to the Federal government in introducing the Deutsche Mark in what was, at the time, still the German Democratic Republic.
Personally, however, Karl Otto Pöhl felt he had been marginalised by politicians. This was one of the reasons he stepped down from the office of Bundesbank President the following year. And so, the most charismatic central banker in Europe - to quote Harold James once again - exited the political stage.
However, even after leaving office, Karl Otto Pöhl remained a critical observer and commentator of monetary integration in Europe, right to the end.
In his final interview, in autumn 2014, he said that the jury was still out on whether the creation of the ECB as an independent central bank had been a successful step towards European integration. Despite this, Pöhl said that the ECB was "one of the few functioning institutions in Europe."
Others have even regarded the ECB, at times, as the sole functioning institution - the only game in town, as it were. For example, speaking at the farewell ceremony of ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet, Helmut Schmidt noted with regard to the crisis in the euro area that the ECB alone had proved itself effective and able to act.
This perception has resulted in the Eurosystem being subject to very high - perhaps excessively high - expectations concerning all the things it could and should do. Due in no small part to the lack of action by governments, it felt compelled time and again to act as a crisis response unit.
The Eurosystem's emergency measures prevented the crisis from escalating. Some would even say that it was ultimately the Eurosystem which kept monetary union alive.
From the point of view of governments, there are also some clear advantages to a central bank that takes on the role of a crisis response unit:
·        It has instruments that are considered to be effective and, above all, has deep pockets.
·        It also makes decisions independently, saving governments from the need to mobilise parliamentary majorities for unpopular decisions.
However, such an approach to central bank independence could potentially put the objective of price stability at risk. After all, the sole justification for central bank independence is that independent central banks with a clear "price stability" mandate are more successful in combatting inflation.
The more widely monetary policymakers interpret their mandate and the more politically active they become, the louder the voices will become for greater monetary policy oversight (and quite rightly so).
What, then, can be done to prevent monetary policymakers being systematically pressured into picking up the pieces?
One way is for the central bank itself to interpret its mandate narrowly. Another is to have effective procedures in place for a stable financial system, sound public finances and competitive economies. After all, the crisis revealed that the success of monetary policy also hinges on factors over which monetary policymakers have no control, such as the state of public finances and a competitive economic structure.
This is another reason why the monetary union needs a more sound footing. The original construction dreamt up by the Delors Commission and implemented in the Maastricht Treaty is fragile. Indeed, there were doubts from the very beginning as to whether this construction would be viable over the long term.
In this context it is interesting what Karl Otto Pöhl said in May 1988, prior even to the Delors Commission, about the consequences of a monetary union and the attendant loss of the possibility of changing exchange rates as an adjustment instrument:
"In a monetary union [...] the weaker would [...] become ever weaker and the stronger ever stronger. We would therefore see great tensions in the real economy in Europe. For this reason alone, a monetary union without the simultaneous integration of, say, fiscal policy, regional policy and social policy, is absolutely inconceivable."
Two years later the Bundesbank published a statement in which it made its position clear that monetary union needs "a more far-reaching commitment in the form of a comprehensive political union for it to be permanent".
A comprehensive transfer of sovereignty to the European level would indeed be one possibility of making the monetary union more robust, provided, of course, that the joint decisions are made with stability in mind. That said, I believe that a permanent monetary union is also possible where there is decentralised responsibility for fiscal and economic policy. But for this to work, liability and control need to be in balance.
This balance, however, has been disrupted by the emergency measures taken to tackle the crisis, as the element of joint liability has been significantly strengthened. Risks have thus been mutualised, but the corresponding control rights have not been transferred to the Community level.
The unity of liability and control is a key prerequisite for monetary union to be stable over the long term. It is only then that responsible decisions will be made. This applies to the business level, where the liability principle includes the possibility of insolvency, and to the political level. Proposals for institutional reform of the monetary union must therefore be judged by this criterion.
Proposals that call for greater risk-sharing without providing for the transfer of sovereignty rights to the Community level do not contribute to preserving the monetary union as a stability union.
The idea of ceding far-reaching sovereignty rights to Brussels, not to mention the challenge of securing the majority support needed to push through the necessary constitutional and treaty changes, appears to be a definite non-starter right now. Quite the contrary, in fact - national politicians take an extremely dim view of warnings from Brussels and flatly reject anything that looks the least bit like an intervention in their fiscal autonomy.
Italy's Prime Minister Matteo Renzi, for instance, says that Italy will not allow a "bureaucrat from Brussels" to dictate its fiscal policy. His remarks were echoed by the French Prime Minister Manuel Valls, who staunchly defended his country's national sovereignty by insisting that he would accept no lessons in good housekeeping.
That's why I wouldn't go quite as far as the columnist from the Neue Zürcher Zeitung, who recently dubbed fiscal union a "pipe dream". But still, a huge question mark hangs over the feasibility of such a move towards deeper integration in the foreseeable future. This tells me it would be more pragmatic to stick to the decentralised framework built around national accountability and to remedy its shortcomings.
The Maastricht framework used two mechanisms to force national fiscal and economic policymakers to pursue a stability-oriented policy path - fiscal rules and financial market discipline.
Neither of them have proven to be particularly effective, it must be said. In fact, since monetary union was launched, some countries, including France and Italy, have breached the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact more often than they have complied with them. And for a long time, the financial markets made virtually no distinction whatsoever between member states with different fiscal fundamentals. At the very least, the interest rate spreads for the countries with particularly high levels of government debt were very narrow.
These fiscal rules may now have been amended in response to the crisis, but that made them much more complicated, and the Commission can now exercise greater discretion in monitoring them. This exposes the Commission to a conflict of interests. On the one hand, it must operate as the guardian of the Treaties and ensure that the rules are heeded. On the other, it is also a political institution that is supposed to strike a balance between a wide variety of interests.
Torn between these two challenges, the Commission has repeatedly shown that it is prepared to accept compromises at the expense of fiscal discipline. Just take the countless extensions it has made to the deadlines for deficit countries to take appropriate corrective action.
Bearing that in mind, the creation of an independent European fiscal authority which takes on the Commission's current tasks in the field of fiscal surveillance would be a step forward. That new body could analyse fiscal planning and outturns and draw up projections to obtain the insights it needs to assess compliance with the existing fiscal rules. It would be more suited to guaranteeing objective oversight and transparent and comprehensible analysis without being distracted by other policy matters.
In a speech 25 years ago, Karl Otto Pöhl said, "If such rules engendering fiscal discipline are one day rendered superfluous by effective self-discipline and market discipline, that's all well and good. But past experience tells us we shouldn't set our expectations all that high."
The lessons we have learned since Pöhl uttered those words validate his scepticism over the extent to which self-discipline and market discipline can effectively guarantee sound public finances. Self-discipline is weak because there is an incentive for governments to run up debt - a temptation that is in fact even more enticing still in a currency union because the capital market is larger in size and the repercussions of unsound policymaking can be passed on to others on a greater scale. As for market discipline, that will malfunction as long as the no bail-out rule lacks credibility.
The original idea behind the no bail-out rule was to ensure that poor fiscal policymaking by governments would be punished by the markets. You will probably already be familiar with the wording of this rule - euro-area member states are not liable for the debts of other member states - in essence, that means each country is responsible for its own financial and economic wellbeing.
But even before the crisis erupted, there were doubts whether this rule had sufficient firepower - and the crisis proved that these doubts were not unwarranted. Euro-area countries, fearing for the stability of the financial system, prevented a number of member states from going bust. Only in Greece was there a "voluntary haircut" with private sector involvement - and that only came two years after the onset of the debt crisis.
The no bail-out rule would only be credible if there were an orderly procedure for restructuring sovereign debt. You could say we need to take the fear factor out of sovereign default - that is, make insolvency a real possibility without posing a risk to financial stability in doing so.
The Bundesbank's proposal to automatically extend the maturities of government bonds if the country in question applies for ESMassistance, aims to do just that. That way, private investors would still be on the hook until it could be ascertained whether the country's payment problems were merely a hiccup or the culmination of deep-seated troubles.
Unlike in the debt crisis, these investors would then have no way of passing the bill to other countries' taxpayers. And it also would significantly reduce the ESM's funding requirements because the debts owed to old creditors would not be repaid initially. Of course, this would require investors to have sufficient financial resources to bear the possible cost of restructuring measures further down the line.
There's no doubting that the regulatory efforts we have seen so far have vastly improved banks' capital position and bolstered the resilience of the financial system. But for many banks, government bonds are so much of a concentration risk that a sovereign default could still bring them to their knees. And that's why we at the Bundesbank don't think it is wise, from a stability policy angle, that banks should be allowed to buy unlimited quantities of government bonds and that they should not be required to back them with a risk-appropriate amount of capital. These were the very factors that sent banks - particularly those in the crisis countries - flocking into bonds issued by their own countries.
That's why we are in favour of putting an end to the preferential regulatory treatment of sovereign debt over the medium term. That would be a further step towards placing monetary union on a sound footing.
Ladies and gentlemen
There are various other approaches to reforming the institutional framework of monetary union I could talk about, but I am loath to outstay my welcome.
I felt it was important to underline that the euro area needs to be placed on a sound footing - one in which liability and control are two sides of the same coin. And I also wanted to stress that the institutional set-up as it currently stands, built as it is around the notion of decentralised responsibility for economic and fiscal policymaking, can be that sound footing if we remedy its shortcomings.
Another point I wanted to make was that Karl Otto Pöhl spotted many of the problems that can arise in a currency union very early on.
But a clairvoyant he was not. Or perhaps he was?
He wrapped up the speech he held here back in April 1988 with the following words: "We can call that currency the franc as far as I'm concerned, only if we do, it must be a franc fort - a strong franc. It would perhaps be more than a merely symbolic gesture to base the institution issuing this European currency in Francfort sur le Main."
As it turned out, the common currency was not called the franc, but Karl Otto Pöhl was right in predicting that the European Central Bank would be established here in Frankfurt.
And of course, Pöhl knew as well as anyone else that being based in Frankfurt alone would do nothing to guarantee stability-oriented monetary policy. That's why he championed the idea of placing the euro on a sound footing. Maintaining stability truly is a never-ending task.

