I welcome you to today’s public hearing here at the ECB in Frankfurt. This event is part of a public consultation on the draft addendum to our guidance to banks on non-performing loans.
As expected, there is a lot of interest in this hearing. Non-performing loans, NPLs for short, have become one of the most widely discussed issues in the European banking sector. That is no surprise, considering the sheer volume of NPLs, which reached around €1 trillion at its peak.
As a banking supervisor, I welcome the fact that NPLs receive so much attention. After all, they do pose a major problem. First of all, they weigh on the balance sheets of banks, curbing their profits. That is a problem as European banks suffer from a lack of profitability anyway. Second, NPLs are distracting and represent a drain on resources. For instance, they absorb the time and energy of bank staff and management, who could be employed more usefully on tasks such as adapting their banks’ business models to the fast-changing environment. Third, NPLs undermine trust in a bank. How much trust would markets and investors have in a bank that is weighed down by high stocks of NPLs?
In short, high levels of NPLs weaken a bank and keep it from doing its job. And that job is, broadly speaking, to finance the economy. As the President of the ECB, Mario Draghi, stated at the ECB Forum on Banking Supervision on 7 November: “Internal ECB analysis shows that, over recent years, banks with high stocks of NPLs have consistently lent less than banks with better credit quality, therefore providing less support to firms and households”. So at the end of the day, NPLs are not just a problem for the affected banks; they are a problem for the entire economy.
The good news is that some progress has already been made. Since 2015, the ratio of non-performing loans in the euro area has gone down from around 7.5 percent to around 5.5 percent. In absolute terms, this is a decrease of around €200 billion. However, that is just an average. There are parts of the banking sector where NPL stocks are still far too high.
This issue needs to be resolved. That has been one of our supervisory priorities right from the start. Our comprehensive assessment back in 2014 helped us to gauge the size of the problem. In 2015, we set up a high-level working group whose job it was to devise a joint supervisory approach. And all the colleagues involved have done a great job. I thank them for it. They have developed an approach which is genuinely European; it aims to ensure a level playing field across the euro area.
In March this year, we published our qualitative guidance to banks on non-performing loans. It sets out the ways in which banks are encouraged to deal with non-performing loans. It should help them to draw up plans which are ambitious yet realistic, and which are backed by adequate governance structures.
Using this guidance as a reference, our Joint Supervisory Teams have assessed the banks’ plans. In short, we expect banks to deploy a diversified set of tools, such as cures, sales and write-offs, to reduce their NPLs. We expect them to reduce their NPLs steadily, year by year. And we expect the envisaged level of provisioning to be in line with the underlying strategy – for instance, with regard to sales of NPLs at current market prices.
Reducing the high stocks of NPLs is the first step. Banks must also ensure that the problem does not recur. And this forward-looking approach is supported by our draft addendum to the guidance.
The draft addendum clarifies our supervisory expectations in respect of the provisioning of loans that become non-performing in the future. So, to be very clear: we are not talking about existing NPLs here; we are not talking about the stocks.
The main purpose of the draft addendum is to make our approach transparent. And I would like to mention something which has sometimes been misunderstood: our expectations are firm, but there are no automatic actions attached to them. We will discuss provisioning with each affected bank: and we will duly consider the clarifications as well as the specific circumstances of the bank. If we are content with the clarifications, then no further action will be proposed. However, if we are not convinced and believe that a bank’s provisions do not adequately cover the credit risk, we may consider supervisory, prudential measures under the Pillar 2 framework.
The ECB plays an important role in resolving NPLs. And in doing so, we take an intrusive approach, but also a fair one. This consultation demonstrates that we are interested in listening to all stakeholders before we take action. However, we are not the only ones who can and should take action. What we need is a joint effort which also involves the banks, regulators and national governments, and EU institutions.
How easily NPLs can be resolved also depends on the national legal and judicial systems. And here, we see many differences between euro area countries. The time required to resolve NPLs in court, for instance, varies considerably. And in some countries, there are no specialised courts or judges to deal with insolvencies. In addition, faster out-of-court settlements are not available as a tool in every country. All these issues slow down the resolution of NPLs, and they could all be addressed by national governments.
Given that we live in a banking union, we should aim for a system which makes it just as easy to resolve an NPL in one country of the euro area as in any other.

