It is a pleasure and a privilege to welcome you to what is now the fourth cash symposium held by the Deutsche Bundesbank. We couldn't have chosen a better day than this Wednesday – not only is it Valentine's Day, it is also Ash Wednesday. Keeping that in mind, I hope you'll forgive me for this play on words: the Germans' love of cash, which we sometimes call "ashes" in slang, is unabated.
The hard facts offer compelling proof of this. The amount of cash in circulation increases from one year to the next. The Eurosystem central banks have now issued almost €1,200 billion, and over half of the banknotes come from one of the Bundesbank's vaults. Our latest study of payment behaviour in Germany also clearly shows that cash has a firm place in the everyday and economic life of people in Germany.
I'd like to begin with an overview of the key findings from the study of payment behaviour, which we are publishing today. For the fourth time, more than two thousand members of the public revealed to us which means of payment they use and how frequently. One of the ways we gathered this information was by asking them to keep a diary of their purchases at the point of sale.
On the whole, we can discern a small but continual change in payment behaviour. Much like the proverb "little strokes fell big oaks", what we are seeing is a slow and steady process whose implications will only become clear several years from now.
For the first time, then, the value of cash payments as a share of the total turnover recorded fell below 50 percent, with the figure calculated for 2017 coming to around 48 percent. In our first study, conducted in 2008, it was still as high as 58 percent. The share of cash payments has thus decreased by roughly one percentage point per year over the past nine years.
This decline is mainly down to increased usage of debit cards, or EC cards as they are also known. While they accounted for 26 percent of turnover in 2008, the current figure has already reached 35 percent. This proves one thing above all: Germans mostly stick to the payment methods they're familiar with. Besides cash, these methods are chiefly debit or EC cards and credit cards, which are slowly pushing down the share of cash payments from year to year.
Of course, the multiplicity of payment means available today also plays a role in the developments we are seeing. There are plenty of cashless forms of payment, from the classic debit and credit cards through e-payment schemes right down to mobile payments, where the smartphone functions as a virtual wallet. Countless though the alternatives may be, cash is still king for the general public.
This impression is corroborated by an analysis of the share of cash payments not by value, but by number of transactions. Here, too, cash is still the most frequently used means of payment, accounting for 74 percent of all transactions. In this breakdown, the payment amount, in particular, plays a deciding role. Payments of up to €5 are made in cash in 96 percent of cases, and even for amounts of up to €50 cash remains the dominant means of payment. Only when the amount is higher than this do consumers increasingly turn to cashless payment methods.
In future, we might also see greater usage of contactless card payments, for example, which currently account for a little more than 1 percent of overall turnover. As the population becomes increasingly tech-savvy, the shares accounted for by alternatives to traditional payment methods could rise. But it's also crucial that they are accepted in retail outlets. The technical requirements of the various means of payment first have to be established at the point of sale. Nonetheless, cash is and remains the public's most frequently used form of payment. And I expect this to be the status quo for some time yet.
I'd like to follow on from this by summarising for you the challenges relating to cash and outlining the Bundesbank's role and position. I'll finish by venturing a prophecy: at the end of the day, cash is and will remain a hotly debated topic, as the forthcoming presentations will no doubt also demonstrate.
There have been a whole host of changes since I took up my position at the Bundesbank in 2010. One of these changes can be described in the words of the former Foreign Minister, Hans-Dietrich Genscher:
"There is no alternative to constantly engaging in new dialogue".
Our cash symposium creates an excellent forum for fruitful interaction among the various players in the cash world. In keeping with what Hans-Dietrich Genscher said, the alternative, which is not to seek dialogue, is therefore not an option.
Moreover, by establishing the international cash conference, with its academic leaning, we have created another regular event at which experts can shed light on cash from various angles. And even though this is probably the last symposium at which I'll be speaking to you as a member of the Bundesbank's Executive Board, I'm certain that this will prove to be an enduring format going forward, too.
One significant challenge was, and still is, the successive introduction of the second series of euro banknotes, called the Europa series. This process, which commenced in 2013 with the €5 banknote, will be wrapped up in the first half of 2019.
Although there were still minor glitches at the beginning – such as some machines not accepting the new banknotes – there were far fewer issues with the subsequent denominations. The general public also took to the new banknotes well, using them for day-to-day payments as a matter of course, whether at the supermarket or at the local village fete.
In the past, the debate surrounding the €500 note made waves among the general public. The media often declared that the Eurosystem was seeing off the largest euro denomination, it was abolishing the "criminal" €500 note. Neither statement stands as is. First, we are simply talking about stopping issuance. Banknotes that are already in circulation will retain their validity as a means of payment and store of value.
Second, the Bundesbank is not aware of any studies proving that ending issuance would be effective. The criminally minded can easily switch to other channels, even beyond cash. I can see the laudable objective behind stopping issuance, but to misquote Goethe: I hear the message well, but lack faith that this is the right way.
At the same time, a number of cash critics are levelling their attention not only at the largest denomination, but also at the one and two cent coins, arguing that they are small, impractical and so expensive to produce that the government makes avoidable losses on them.
Minting and issuing coins is a sovereign task – it is known as the coinage prerogative. The Federal Government still makes an annual profit of more than €300 million from the task of minting and issuing all coin denominations. Even the issuance of one and two cent coins generates a profit for the Federal Ministry of Finance.
When it comes to the question of doing away with small coins, the Bundesbank is interested in the views of retailers and consumers. Our regular studies show that a large majority of the public wish to keep the small coins. And if you ask me, that's a wish we should respect.
Additionally, the European Commission is considering a general ban on cash transactions exceeding a certain limit. Its reasons are similar to those cited in the debate about the €500 note: caps on cash payment are supposed to limit illicit work, tax evasion and terrorist financing.
One thing is clear: we do have to combat criminality. But I'm not aware of any countries with a cap on cash payments having less crime than we do here.
The lack of effectiveness is another major reason why this proposal has met with broad opposition among the public. The European Commission last year held a public consultation on cash payment caps. The public response was unequivocal: an overwhelming majority of 95 percent of respondents decisively reject a cap. There's no ignoring such a clear response.
A number of economists, among them renowned Harvard professors, even go as far as to claim that cash has outlived its usefulness and should be scrapped altogether. They argue that it is expensive and inefficient, a relic of the past.
I'll admit they're right on one count, at least: cash does have a long tradition, which can rightly be hailed as a centuries-old success story. Thanks, not least, to its many merits, cash has forged a path as a means of payment all over the world.
Cash is simple, secure and quick to use. It enables people of all ages to participate in society, not to mention the fact that it is the only means of payment that leaves no digital traces. This should not be ignored, especially in this day and age, when personal data and information have become a new source of profit for many companies. This is mainly true of cashless payments, where third parties are able to find out where and when you bought a particular product.
The investor George Soros painted a suitably grim picture of the future at the World Economic Forum in Davos recently, warning against the influence of internet monopolies, whose position gives them the potential to do harm, at the very least. By collecting personal data on an ever larger scale, these companies could exert a growing influence on the lives of every one of us.
Cash users, on the other hand, can remove themselves from this risk to a certain extent. On a day-to-day basis, cash not only enables personal data to be protected, but also allows individuals to exercise their right to determine what information about themselves is made public.
I'll even go one step further. Cash is minted freedom. There is absolutely no doubt in my mind that cash will still matter in the future.
Cash is used not just as a means of payment, however, but also as a store of value. This was particularly evident during the financial crisis in 2008, when members of the public withdrew cash from their accounts out of concern for their savings. Banknotes were put aside – including in Germany.
The same effect was seen in Catalonia last year: shortly before the crisis peaked, withdrawals surged across all of Spain. These examples illustrate the prevailing belief among the public: cash conveys security and is a visible mark of trust in the euro.
Numerous commercial banks in the euro area have also discovered the benefits of cash over the past few years. Instead of being hit with negative interest rates when holding their balance in their central bank account, credit institutions are holding some of their deposits in the form of cash. In Germany alone, this has meant that banknotes with an estimated value of at least €12 billion are stored in commercial banks' vaults.
Some economists therefore see cash as an obstacle to monetary policy stimulus. High negative interest rates are unfeasible, they say, because interest-free cash is always there as an alternative.
That may be true, but the consequence – which is the call for the wholesale abolition of cash – is out of line, in my opinion. Our cash is not the cause of deeper problems which monetary policy can help to eliminate. To use a metaphor: as with an illness, it's no use treating just the symptoms – and with the wrong medication, too. Getting rid of cash for monetary policy reasons harbours great risks, and the cons outweigh the pros by far. That's why, in the face of all those who advocate the idea of cutting short cash's centuries-old success story, I resolutely steer them away from the abolition of cash.
Now, I don't claim to be able to predict the future like the Oracle of Delphi, but we can already see that cash will face further challenges in the future. Several of the issues I've described are sure to be among them.
Yet one thing is certain: the Bundesbank will fulfil its statutory mandate for cash payments, and for cashless payments, in the future, too. Amongst other duties, this includes the provision of high-quality cash. And on that topic, I'm already looking forward to the premiere of the film about the German cash cycle, which Stefan Hardt, our Director General Cash Management, will present to you this afternoon.
What is more, the Bundesbank will continue to be heavily involved in the debate about the future of cash, and not as an end in itself. The respect that the general public have for their banknotes and coins is considerable. The freedom to pay in whatever form they choose as consumers is precious and dear to them. Each individual decides whether they will pay in cash or using cashless means. And the Bundesbank performs its statutory mandate for cash and cashless payments in accordance with section 3 of the Bundesbank Act.
I have delved into the world of cash and cashless payment systems over the past eight years. There were rarely simple answers to complex problems. Up until the end of 2017, the Bundesbank had issued banknotes with a value of €635 billion, which equates to around €7,700 per capita in arithmetical terms. Hardly anyone is likely to have that much to hand, as our study showed that we carry an average of €107 in our wallets. Some 50 percent of the banknotes, possibly more, are likely to be hoarded outside the euro area as stores of value. An incredible token of confidence in the euro.

